Page iii
The New Book of Forms
A Handbook of Poetics
Lewis Turco
NE University Press of New England
Hanover and London

Pagi
UNIVERSITY PRESS OF NEW ENGLAND publishes books under it
own imprint and is the publisher for Brandeis University Press,
Dartmouth College, Middlebury College Press, University of New
Hampshire, Tufts University, and Wesleyan University Press.
University Press of New England, Hanover, n 03755
© 1986 by University Press of New England
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION DA'
Turco, Lewis.
The new book of forms.
Expanded revision of: Book forms published in 1968.
1. Poetics. 2. Versification. I. Turco, Lewis.
Book forms. II. Title.
PN1042.T78 1986 808.1 86-40116
ISBN 0-87451-380-4
ISBN 0-87451-381-2 (pbk.)
John Crowe Ransom, "Bells for John Whiteside's Daughter," from
Selected Poems, Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged, copyright Alfrer
A. Knopf, Inc., reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.

For old friends:
Charlie Davis and Hyatt Waggoner,
and in memory of Loring Williams.
Page v

CONTENTS
Preface
I. A Handbook of Poetics
1. Introduction
2. The Typographical Level
3. The Sonic Level
4. The Sensory Level
5. The Ideational Level
II. The New Book of Forms
6. Form-Finder Index
7. The Forms of Poetry
Appendix: Analytical Outline
Index of Authors and Titles
Index of Terms
Page vil
1
3
5
8
47
61
79
81
90
257
259
269

Page ix
PREFACE
Like the original Book of Forms, which was published in 1968 and
subsequently became the standard in its field, The New Book of
Forms: A Handbook of Poetics is intended as a text and reference
work for students and teachers of poetry in general and of verse
composition in particular. Although the accent is on the forms of
poetry, this volume contains all the information essential to a study of
poetics ranging from the Middle Ages to the present.
The volume begins with a "Handbook of Poetics" arranged in
"levels"the typographical, the sonic, the sensory, and the ideational
levels. These chapters survey the two modes of writingprose and
verseand various prosodic and metrical systems, clarify terms such as
rhythm, cadence, and meter, and provide clear explanations of the
processes and methods of versification. Figurative language is defined
and discussed, as are considerations such as diction, style, syntax, and
overtone.
The second part of the volume is called "The New Book of Forms,"
and it begins with a "Form-Finder Index" in which all the forms
contained in the volume are listed and divided, first into specific
forms, and then into general forms. Under "specific forms" there are
further subdivisions, beginning with one-line forms and working
through to two hundred ten-line forms.
Should you wish to know the form of a poem you are studying, rather
than leaf through all the forms in the book, you can first determine (1)
the rhyme scheme of the poem or stanza in question and (2) its meter.
Then you can (3) count the lines in the form and turn to the Form-
Finder. There, under the appropriate heading, will be a short list of

Page x
whole poem patterns, from which you can determine the exact name
of the poem form in question.
Similarly, should a student of verse composition wish to use a form of
a specific length, he or she can consult the Form-Finder to discover an
interesting structure. Many students find there is no quicker way to
improve their writing than through formal experimentation and
attempts to solve specific technical problems.
Following the Form-Finder is the most comprehensive compilation of
the verse forms traditionally used in Anglo-American prosody ever
gathered between covers. Over three hundred forms are listed
alphabetically, dozens of which have been added for this edition of
The New Book of Forms.
Our heritage of forms is rich. We are heirs not only of British metrical
systems, but also of systems derived from Europe, the Middle East,
and Asia. Our history of verse forms goes back to the Normans, the
Anglo-Saxons, and the Celts, and we have derived much from the
systems of the Hebrews, the Greeks, the Italians, and the French. The
verse forms set forth here have all been utilized by poets of the
English-speaking world. During every period of English letters,
craftsfolk and bards have explored the possibilities of the formal
structure of verse and extended the range of those structures.
This new version of The New Book of Forms adds a feature the
original edition did not have: examples of poems written in each form
by poets from all periods. Each form is described succinctly in prose.
Where necessary, a unique schematic diagramming system lays the
pattern of the form out on the page so that its structure is clear.
Generally, there follows at least one poem exemplifying the form,
always in a modern English version; or, if the form is a relatively
common one, the reader will be referred to a specific author or to an

Page xi
tionships and similarities among many of the forms. It is my hope that
users will find this edition even more useful than the original version
of The Book of Forms: A Handbook of Poetics.
Acknowledgments
The New Book of Forms is based upon these previous publications:
The Book of Forms, New York: E. P. Dutton, copyright 1968 by
Lewis Turco; Creative Writing in Poetry, Albany: State University of
New York, copyright 1970 by the State University of New York;
Poetry: An Introduction Through Writing, Reston, Virginia: Reston
Publishing Company, copyright 1973 by Reston Publishing Company,
Inc., a Prentice-Hall Company. All rights, including reversions of
rights, reserved 1985, 1986 by Lewis Turco. Besides the
acknowledgments previously made in these publications, the author
owes a debt of gratitude to the State University of New York College
at Oswego for a sabbatical leave during the spring term of 1986, when
this book was put into its final shape.
The examples of Welsh poetry forms are reprinted from The Airs of
Wales: Medieval Welsh Poems in Modern English by Wesli Court,
published as a special issue of the Temple University Poetry
Newsletter, No. 53, Fall 1981, all rights, including reversion of rights,
reserved by Wesli Court, copyright 1981, 1986 by Wesli Court. "Love
Curse," "Robyn and Makyn," and "The Eunuch Cat," are from
Courses in Lambents, Oswego: Mathom Publishing Co., copyright
1977 by Wesli Court. "Bref Double a 1'Echo," "The Blacksmiths,"
"Hornpipepithalamion," "A Lover's Curse," and "The Swift Replies"
are from Curses and Laments, published as a special issue of Song,
No. 5, copyright 1978 by Richard Behm, all rights, including
reversion of rights, reserved and copyrighted 1986 by Wesli Court.
All rights to his other poems

Page xii
and to the remaining versions of the Medieval poems in modern
English are reserved and copyrighted 1973, 1986 by Wesli Court.
The following poems are from an unpublished manuscript, A Sampler
of Hours: Poems on Lines from Emily Dickinson's Letters, all rights
reserved by Lewis Turco: "A Dainty Sum," originally published in
Poetry Northwest, 1980; "First Snow," originally published as a
Christmas card by George O'Connell and Lewis Turco, 1985; "The
Naked Eye," originally published in The Sewanee Review, 1983;
"Poetry" and "An Amherst Haiku," originally published in The
Ontario Review, 1985. All other poems by Lewis Turco herein
copyrighted 1960, 1971, 1973, 1980, 1981, 1986 by Lewis Turco.
L.T.
OSWEGO, NEW YORK
FEBRUARY 1986

Page 3
1
Introduction
Poetry is a literary Genre Or type of literature. Other genres are fiction,
drama, and essay (among other kinds of "nonfiction" such as
journalism, biography, autobiography, pedagogy, and so forth).
Fiction can be defined as written narrative; drama, as theatrical
narrative; and the essay, as written rhetorical exposition.
Fiction. All writers use language for various purposes, but in general
the fiction writer's purpose is to tell a story; he or she thus uses
language to carry a narrative. To tell a story the fiction writer needs
four basic elements: character, plot, atmosphere, and theme, as well
as a number of narrative language techniques. For further information
about this genre, see the entry for NARRATIVES.
Drama. The dramatist's purpose, like that of the fiction writer, is to
tell a story using character, plot, atmosphere, and theme; however, he
or she can ordinarily use only the narrative language techniques of
dialogue, monologue, or soliloquy. Unlike the fictionist, however, the
dramatist can supplement these written narrative techniques with the-
atrical techniques such as representation (scenes, costumes, and
physical actions). For further information about this genre, see the
entry for DRAMATICS.
Essay. In its modern sense, an essay is a written discussion or
exposition of a particular subject or an argument in favor of or against
a point of view. In either case, the essayist has a point to make
regarding a subject, and the focus is on the subject he or she is
considering. The techniques of the essayist are generally rhetorical
rather than narrative. The ele-

Page 4
ments of an essay are likewise four: the subject being examined, the
thesis or statement to be made concerning the subject, the argument or
the logical proofs and data required to back the thesis statement, and
the conclusion reached, which is usually identical with the thesis. For
further information about this genre, see the entry on DIDACTICS.
Poetry. Since the poet can tell a story using either written or theatrical
techniques, or can treat a particular subject by means of written
rhetorical techniques, his or her primary focus must be on something
other than the narrative or argument. In fact, what differentiates the
poet from other writers is the focus on mode, on language itself. The
poet focuses upon the literary resources of language in the same way a
musician concentrates upon sound, the painter upon form, or the
dancer upon movement.
Poetry can thus be defined as the art of language, as distinguished
from fiction which is the art of written narrative, from drama, the art
of theatrical narrative, or from the essay, the art of written rhetoric.
The poet is specifically the artist of language; his or her concentration
is upon the language itself. To concentrate upon the material of this
genre, the poet, like the other writers, must utilize four elements, but
in this case they are elements of language, on four different levels,
rather than elements of narration or argument. The levels of poetry are
the typographical, the sonic, the sensory, and the ideational. A fifth
"level"that of fusionis a part of all genres. Fusion considers the
question, "How do the elements of this story, poem, essay or play
come together to achieve a final effect?"

Page 5
2
The Typographical Level
Several things about a poem can be ascertained merely by looking at it
on the printed page. First, one can generally tell in which of the two
modes of language a poem is written; second, one can tell the
proportion in figure of a poem; that is, whether it is written in
strophes or stanzas.
Mode. There are only two modes in which any genre can be written,
prose and verse. Prose is unmetered language; verse is metered
language. Any of the genres can be written in either of the modes; that
is, there are prose narratives and verse narratives, prose dramas and
verse dramas, prose essays and verse essays. Likewise, there are
prose poems and verse poems. Depending upon the poet's culture, a
poem can be written primarily in prose, as in the Hebrew Old
Testament, or in verse, as in the Anglo-Saxon poem, Beowulf. There
is, thus, only one logical answer to the question, "What is the
difference between poetry and prose?" Poetry is a genre, and prose is
a mode.
On the typographical level, it is usually possible to distinguish, from
the lengths of the lines, whether a poem is written in prose or verse.
Prose poems generally have lines of various lengths; verse poems
ordinarily show lines of similar length. Sight, however, is not always
accurate, and lines ought to be scanned to discover whether or not
meter is present.
To meter means to count. In verse, what is usually counted is
syllablesall syllables, only stressed syllables, or all syllables and
stressed syllables. Meters will be further explained when I discuss the

Page 6
certain the number of syllables in a verse-mode poem. Scansion will
also be discussed later.
Sometimes an entire poem will be built primarily upon the
typographical level of language. Such poems are called spatials, and
they achieve their primary effect on the level of sight. There are two
kinds of spatial poetry, the calligramme, an otherwise normal poem
written in a shaped stanza, and the concrete poem, which achieves its
effect mainly through its configuration. For more information about
such poems, see the entry on spaTIaLs.
Proportion in Figure. A poem can be written in sections and even in
subsections. Larger sections are called "cantos," "fits," "movements,"
or other terms. Smaller sections are either strophes or stanzas. Stanzas
are short sections of a single poem, each made up of the same number
of lines. Strophes are short sections of a single poem made up of
differing numbers of lines.
Various other things can be discerned simply by studying the
appearance of a poem, aspects having to do with layout and
punctuation. Prose poems are sometimes mislabeled "free verse," but
this misnomer is a contradiction in terms, as we have seen, for there
are only two modes of languageprose and verse. Either language is
metered, or it is not metered; it cannot be both simultaneously. If
language is not metered, it is prose; however, prose poems are
sometimes laid out on the page so that they appear to approximate
verse.
Longer-lined prose poems are often laid out by the sentence, printed
on the page as a visible unit rather than as part of a paragraph. This
practice was used by the eighteenth-century English poet Christopher
Smart and the nineteenth-century American poet Walt Whitman in
their prose poems. Such works are often built on a system of

Page 7
discover that each line begins with the same word or phraseagain,
such as in the work of Smart, Whitman, Carl Sandburg, Robinson
Jeffers, and many poets of the twentieth century. Shorter-lined prose
poems are often laid out by the clause or the phrase, each clause or
phrase being allocated its own line. This construct is called line-
phrasing, and it occasionally omits punctuation at the ends of lines
entirely, the end of the line serving as sight punctuation. See the entry
on the triversen for further discussion of line-phrasing.
Verse poems might exhibit end-stopping, which means there is
terminal punctuationan exclamation point, a question mark, or a
periodat the end of a line ("stich" in older English terminology) or of a
larger unit such as a couplet ("twime"), triplet ("thrime"), or quatrain
("tetrastich"). If there is no punctuation and the line runs onto the next
line, the poem is enjambed. A verse paragraph may or may not
coincide with a stanza or a strophe. Like the prose paragraph, the
verse paragraph is a group of lines in a metrical poem that deals with
matters that have logical relationships with one another and a common
focus. If the verse paragraph does not coincide with the end of a
stanza or a strophe, the poet will often drop down a step
typographically within a line to indicate that a new paragraph is
beginning. The device of stepping is also sometimes used to indicate a
caesura, or a pause in the center of a line. Rather than stepping the
line, a poet might, on occasion, use sight punctuation in the form of an
extra space within a line to indicate the caesura. More will be said
about the caesura in the chapter "The Sonic Level" and in the entry
ANGLO-SAXON PROSODY.

Page 8
3
The Sonic Level
Rhythm is at the root of traditional English-language poetry, and one
of the basic functions of the poet is to order the rhythms of language.
Several terms must be distinguished here:
1. Cadence is the alternation of stressed and unstressed syllables in
language.
2. Rhythm is the movement of cadences in language.
3. Prosody is a system of poetic composition.
4. Meter is a particular pattern of prosody that counts syllables in
verse.
Prose Prosodies
The oldest prosody in the world is based not upon counting syllables,
but on grammatically parallel language structures. The theory of
grammatic parallelism is simple: within a sentence or longer unit,
repeat the same grammatical structures; for instance, "I came, I saw, I
conquered." This line is one sentence made up of three independent
clauses. All the subjects are the same; all the predicates are in the
same verb tense. If the clauses are broken into lines, the parallels are
immediately apparent:
I came,
I saw,
I conquered.
Let us look at another sentence: "I like bananas, cherries, and apples."

Page 9
subject transitive
verb
I
like
object
bananas
cherries
apples
The compound object is in parallel. Though parallelism can get a great
deal more complicated than this, the principle is always the same.
Parallel structures appear in both prose and verse, but as a governing
prosody or system of poetry composition, it appears most often in
prose.
By repeating parallel structures, the poet causes stressed and
unstressed syllables to appear in approximately, sometimes exactly,
the same places, thus setting up a rhythm. Here is an example, a
portion of The Song of Solomon from the King James Version of the
Bible:
Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast
doves' eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats,
that appear from mount Gilead.
Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which
came up from the washing; whereof every one bears twins,
and none is barren among them.
Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely:
thy temples are like a piece of pomegranate within thy locks.
Thy neck is like the tower of David builded for an armoury,
whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of
mighty men.
Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins, which

feed among the lilies.
Notice that, in this example, a certain rhythm is set up by the
repetitions of the parallel structures in the first two lines:
Bčhold, thou art fair, my love;
behold, thou art fair:
thou hast doves' eyes
withín thy locks:

Page 10
thy hair is asă flock of goars,
thăt appear from Mount Gilead.
Several things have been changed in this passage. First, it has been
line-phrased; second, it has been scannedan ictus or accent-mark (*)
has been placed above each stressed syllable and a breve (~) above
each unstressed syllable. The following shows the rhythmic patterns
created by the parallel structures of the first two lines:
ابا ايي اي
Though this example is prose, not verse, it can be seen that the
repetition of parallel grammatical structures produces an effect like
that of verse, and even the typographical appearance of verse can be
reproduced by line-phrasing. You can also divide these rhythmic
patterns from one another by the use of dividers:
The first pattern contains two syllables, the first unaccented and the
second accented. This pattern is commonly called an iamb. The
second pattern has three syllables, two unaccented followed by an
accented syllable. Such a pattern is commonly called an anapest.
More will be said later about these patterns, called verse feet, when I
speak of meters. For the moment, it is sufficient to understand that
English prose rhythms are predominantly iambic and anapestic.
To return to grammatic parallelism, there are four major types of
specific parallel structures found in the Bible: synonymous, synthetic,
antithetical, and climactic.
Synonymous parallelism breaks each clause or sentence in two. The
second half paraphrases the statement made in the first half:

Page 11
For, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone;
The flowers appear on the earth; the time of the singing
of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in
the land
Synthetic parallelism also divides the clause or sentence, but the
second half gives a consequence of the first half:
I rose up to open to my beloved; and my hands dropped
with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh,
upon the handles of the lock.
Antithetical parallelism, too, breaks the clause or sentence in half, but
the second half rebuts or contradicts the first half:
I sleep, but my heart waketh ....
Climactic parallelism does not necessarily break a clause or sentence
in half; rather, it can pile stronger and stronger clauses or sentences
upon one another until the series ends at its apex:
Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my
garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Let my beloved
come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.
This type of "heaping figure" is also called a catalog.
Isoverbal* Prosody
In Hebrew poetry, other strictures might be imposed upon the system
of grammatics. For instance, a perfect parallel (isocolon) not only
observes the requirements of divided parallel structures, but also
might require the same number of words in each half, or even the
same number of syllables. Here is an example drawn from Psalm 26in
these lines the word count in each half-sentence is seven (7):

Page 12
I have not sat with vain persons.
neither v
will it
so in with
dissemblers.
I have hated the congregation of evildoers:
and will not sit
with the wicked
Isoverbal prosody can be used by itself as a loose metrical system;
strictly speaking, however, only syllable-counting systems are truly
metrical. The effect of isoverbal prosody is more like that of prose,
since words can contain various numbers of syllables.
There are three specific isoverbal prosodies:
1. Normative wordcount assigns the same number of words to each
line, as in the example above.
2. Quantitative wordcount varies the lengths of lines in the first
stanza, but the following stanzas keep the same word counts as the
first, line for line.
3. Variable wordcount sets certain limits on the lengths of lines, but
within these limits the number of words per line can varyfor instance,
the poet might decide that there will be a minimum of three words in
each line and a maximum of seven.
Metrical Prosodies
Syllabic Prosody
This system is based upon counting all syllables in a line of verse,
whether they are stressed or unstressed. Japanese verse is syllabic,
and, more to the point, so is Celtic versethe poetry of the ancient
Gaels of Scotland, Ireland, Wales, Cornwall, and other regions of the
British Isles. Furthermore, French prosody is syllabic. The latter,
introduced into England proper at the time of the Norman Invasion
(AD. 1066) is thus ancient and native to English literature. There is

Page 13
There are three specific syllabic prosodies:
1. Normative syllabics assigns the same number of syllables to each
line.
2. Quantitative syllabics varies the lengths of lines in the first stanza,
but the following stanzas keep the same syllable counts as the first,
line for line.
3. Variable syllabics sets certain limits for the lengths of lines, but
within these limits the number of syllables per line can varyfor
instance, the poet might decide that there will be a minimum of three
syllables in each line and a maximum of seven.
Here is a normative syllabic poem, each line having six (6) syllables.
It is a composite poem based on lines from Emily Dickinson's letters:
A Dainty Sam
4 5 6
One is a dainty sum!
One bird, one cage, one fight;
one song in those far woods
where mandrake likes to dream,
where dragonfly patrols
its image in the stream;
one song out of the limb
of juniper or fir
moving across the field
The following is a quantitative syllabic poem from the same source.
The syllable counts are 8-7-8:
First Snow
A thousand little winds wafted
to me this morning an air
fragrant with forest leaves and bright

Page 14
autumnal berries. Now and then
a gray leaf fell. Crickets sang
all day long. High in a crimson
tree a belated bird trembled
there must be many moments
in an eternal day. Alas!
I remember the leaves were falling,
and now there are falling snows.
Are not leaves the brethren of snows?
I dream of being a grandame
and binding my silver hairs,
the children dancing around me.
These poems are examples of found poetry, or at least partially found.
Sometimes in reading you run across a piece of prose you feel is
"poetic"that is, it is written in enhanced language. In fact, it is poetry,
despite its being written in the prose mode. Because of tradition,
English readers think poetry must be written in verse. If we cannot get
over our mind-set, or if we want to call other people's attention to our
discovery, we might set the lines off to look like verse or, in fact, put
them in verse (as in the preceding poems). Found poetry is a subgenre
of the literary genre called poetry; subgenres will be discussed more
fully elsewhere.
Lines of syllabic verse can be described by affixing these prefixes to
the root "syllabics": mono (1), di (2), tri (3), tetra (4), penta (5), hexa
(6), hepta (7), octo (8), nono (9), deca (10), and hendeca (11). The
poem "A Dainty Sum," then, is written in hexasyllabic lines. The first
and third lines of each triplet stanza of "First Snow" are octosyllabic,
but the second lines are heptasyllabic. (Note that the shorter lines are
indented.)

Page 15
in a line. Old English (Anglo-Saxon) prosody is in fact a specific form
of accentual verse. The oldest European vernacular literature (that is,
literature other than classical Latin or Greek) is written in accentual
prosody, which is ancient and native to England.
There are several specific accentual prosodies:
1. Normative accentuals assigns the same number of stresses to each
line: see the entry on ANGLO-SAXON PROSODY.
2. Quantitative accentuals varies the lengths of lines in the first
stanza, but the following stanzas keep the same stress counts as the
first, line for line (as in song measure found in the entry titled EDDA
MEASURES).
3. Variable accentuals sets certain limits for the lengths of lines, but
within these limits the number of stresses per line can vary, as in the
entries on TRIVERSEN and TRIVERSEN STANZA.
The words stress and accent are often used interchangeably, but we
can differentiate them by thinking of stress as emphasis placed upon a
syllable by special means, as in rhetorical stress: "What did you say?"
Accent is simply the ordinary emphasis placed on at least one syllable
in a word of two or more syllables. To find out which syllable of a
word is normally accented, a dictionary can, and should, be consulted.
Words of one syllable might or might not be stressed, depending on
their importance or on their context in the sentence. Coordinating
conjunctions (and, but, or, nor, for), articles (a, the), prepositions (of,
on, in), and such parts of speech are seldom stressed. On the other
hand, verbs and nouns of one syllable are often stressed.
English does not easily accommodate three unstressed syllables in a
row; therefore, when three normally unstressed syllables appear
together, the middle syllable is promoted to stressed status:

Page 16
Linguists differentiate among several levels of stress: primary,
secondary, tertiary, quaternary, and so forth. For our purposes,
however, we need be concerned only with overstressing or sprung
stress, ordinary stress, and secondary stress.
Much accentual verse, and some syllabic verseespecially Celtic
syllabic verseis written alliteratively: the stressed syllables are
overemphasized or sprung by a series of words that use the same
beginning consonantal sound, as in "Looms as the last laugh at last ...
. " If we scan this line we will discover that the stresses fall on the
alliterated first syllables:
Looms as the last laugh at last
(Note that the accent mark is always placed above the vowel sound,
not the consonant.)
If we listen closely to the line, we will also hear that it tends to divide
itself in halfthere is a pause in the line between the second and third
accented syllables:
Looms as the fast - laugh at fast
This method is that of ANGLO-SAXON ProsoDy and of some of the EDDA MEASURES:
four stressed syllables in a stich. Some of the stressed syllables will be
sprung with alliteration, assonance, rhyme, or vocalic and consonantal
echo, all of which will be discussed later. The stich is broken into
hemistichs (half-lines) by a caesura in the center of the line. In a
whole stich there are four stresses; in the hemistichs, two stresses
(dipods).
1. The two center-stressed syllables can alliterate:
over the stars • stunning their fires.
2. The first three stressed syllables can alliterate:

Page 17
3. The last three stressed syllables can alliterate:
its unique symmetry • the summit of song.
4. All four syllables can alliterate, as in the previously quoted line
("Looms as the last laugh at last").
5. Sometimes the alliteration continues into the following stich, and
sometimes there is cross-alliteration between stichs:
his blood springing from ringing rock
till the long rain • of time shall spill...
6. On occasion, what is alliterated is the absence of consonants; then,
any vowel can alliterate (actually, consonate) with any other:
at this mártyr • and at his art.
(Note that in this last example the vowel sounds "at" and "martyr,"
and "at" and "art" are not the same.)
H. Idris Bell and David Bell, in their translation of the medieval
Welsh poet Dafydd ap Gwilym (Fifty Poems, London, 1942), describe
the bardic sonic devices, known as cynghanedd (kíng-ha-neth), that
are associated with medieval Welsh syllabic verse but whose effects
are similar to those found in association with Anglo-Saxon prosody.
There are four main types of cynghanedd:
1. "In Cynghanedd Groes there is an exact correspondence between
the consonants in the first half of the line and those in the second, so
that every consonant in the first finds its [consonantal echo] in the
second, and there is no consonant unaccounted for in the scheme, with
the exception of the final syllable in each half":
This tone is his, •the stone's song,..

Page 18
3. "In Cynghanedd Lusg the penultimate (next-to-last) stressed
syllable is rhymed with a syllable in the first part of the line":
his blood spring from rung rock.
4."
... and Cynghanedd Sain has an internal rhyme together with
[consonantal echo] between the second rhyming word and the last
word in the line":
no other than • brother of his breath,
Twentieth-century Welsh poets such as Dylan Thomas have used
cynghanedd effects in their poetry, though they have not necessarily
followed the exact strictures of these four patterns. All these lines,
however, were taken from a single poem, which itself is an illustration
of how various alliterative and echoic devices can work when they are
put together. Notice that, in this poem, the lines have been stepped at
the caesurae:
The Morbid Man Singing
This tone is his,
the stone's song,
No other than
brother of his breath,
fang of water,
tongue of the air.
He is life's fool,
and his leaf's fall
looms as the last
laugh at last
at this martyr
and at his art.
But the leaf shall lie
lightly upon him,

Page 19
his blood sprung
from rung rock
till the long rain
of time shall spill
over the stars,
stunning their fires.
WESLI COURT
If all syllables in each line are counted, the numbers will be seen to
vary, while the number of accented syllables remains constant.
Whatever remains most constant is the poem's prosody. For another
example of normative accentual verse, see the entry on the BOB AND WHEEL.
Gerard Manley Hopkins in his poem "God's Grandeur" paid no
attention to keeping only a certain number of beats to the line, but he
heavily accented his stresses. Although the following poem is rhymed
like an ITALIAN SonNeT, ordinarily written in iambic pentameter, accentual-
syllabic verse (to be discussed subsequently), it is actually an example
of alliterated, variable accentual verse. Hopkins called this system
"sprung rhythm." The principle is much the same as in Anglo-Saxon
prosody, except that there can be more or fewer than four accents in
the line, and Hopkins used rhyme as well as alliteration. Note that the
rhyme scheme determines the line indentations:
God's Grandeur
The world is charged with the grándeur of God
It will fame out, like shining from shook foll;
It gáthers to a greatness, like the ooze of oil
Crushed. Why đo men then now not reck his rod?
Gencrations have trod, have trod, have trod;
And all is seared with trade; bleared, smeared with toil;
And wears man's smudge and shares man's smell: the soil
Is bare now, nor can foot feel, being shod.

Page 20
And for all this, nature is never spent;
There lives the dearest freshness deep down things;
And though the last lights off the black West went
Oh, morning, at the brown brink eastward, springs--
Because the Holy Ghost over the bent
World broods with warm breast and with ah! bright wings.
-GERARD MANLEY HOPKINS
Notice in particular line four, which contains eight stresses in a row,
impossible in English without overstressing by using sonic devices
such as rhyme (men-then), alliteration (now-not, reck-rod),
consonantal echo (men-then-now-not), or assonance (men-then-reck).
Note also that, despite overstressing, the accents on "do," "then," and
"not" are secondary. Instead of the situation where the central syllable
in a row of three unstressed syllables is promoted to secondary stress,
here the central syllable in a row of three stressed syllables is demoted
to secondary stress.
A schematic diagram of the scansion of line four, if each syllable is
represented by the letter X, would look like this:
xxx****×*
Crushed. Why do men then now not reck his rod?
If we remove the words,
*xxxxxxxxx
An American form of variable accentuals is called TrIvErsen stanza, and
it has been widely used in the twentieth century. Based partly on
grammatics, partly on unalliterated accentual verse, the triversen was
the favorite form, and the invention, of William Carlos Williams.
Podic Prosody
Podics stands halfway between strong-stress verse and accentual-
syllabic prosody; in fact, because it typically uses rhyme, many people
believe it is accentual-syllabics. Podics

Page 21
is a holdover in folk poetryballads, nursery rhymes, broadside verseof
the old Anglo-Saxon line.
The meter of a podic poem (or of any accentual verses) is indicated by
affixing the standard prefixes to the root pod, which means "foot"
(although the meters of podic prosody are not verse feet in the normal
sense of the term used in English poetics). Thus, "monopodic" means
one-stress, "dipodic," two-stress, and so on through tripodic,
tetrapodic, pentapodic, hexapodic, and so forth. The primary meter of
podic verse is dipody.
The dipodic line, like the hemistich of Anglo-Saxon prosody, contains
two accented syllables. Strong stresses only are counted; unstressed
and secondary-stressed syllables are generally ignored in the metric.
Each line containing two strong stresses is, in effect, a hemistich of
Anglo-Saxon prosody:
Old Mother Goose, • When she wanted to wånder,
Rode through the air • On a véry fine gander.
Note that the normally stressed first syllable in "Mother" has been
demoted to secondary stress because of the sprung, long • sound in
"Old" and the even heavier long a sound in "Goose." Normally, two
dipodic lines (one stich) form a half-unit of dipodic verse, and two
more hemistichs (again, one stich) are needed to complete the couplet
unit (distich or twime), which is rhymedoften with falling rhymes
(feminine endingsfurther explained later under the heading
"Proportion in Rhyme").
Put as simply as possible, a dipodic unit is nothing more than a
couplet made of two rhyming stichs (a distich) of Anglo-Saxon
prosody. The caesura between hemistichs becomes the ends of lines 1
and 3, so that the couplet appears on paper as a quatrain:

Page 22
Rode through the air
On a very fine gander.
ANONYMOUS
A whole set of stanzas in the family called coMMoN MEASURE and BALLAD
STANZA grew out of this podic quatrain. Many hymns are cast in
common measure forms. Emily Dickinson, Isaac Watts, and William
Blake, among many others, used common measure forms, often
regularized as accentual-syllabics rather than podics.
Although podics added rhyme and did not necessarily keep the
alliteration of Anglo-Saxon prosody, especially not in every line, the
verse did depend heavily on sonic devices. J. R. R. Tolkien, in his
"Prefatory Remarks" to J. P. Clark's translation of Beowulf (London,
1941), isolated six basic hemistichs in Anglo-Saxon prosody, and
these basic halflines have been retained in many dipodic poems:
1. The double-fall (v'-), as in
Mistress Mary,
Quite contrary
2. The double-rise (u*w'), as in
with silver bells
and cocklě shélls
3. The rise-and-fall (ur ru), as in
Thẽ two gray kắts
4. The rise-and-descend (*r•v), as in
Mý Maid Mary
s. The fall-and-ascend (r•u•), as in
To wào the owl

Page 23
6. The descend-anu-rise (rut), as in
Hark! Hárk! the lark!
There are, however, many more rhythmic variations possible. Two
others are also quite common:
7. The short rocking foot (rut), as in
Sce thěm jump up ănd down!
(Called the amphimacer in accentual-syllabic verse, it is almost never
found in English language poetry written in that prosody.)
8. The long rocking foot (row'), as in
Hippěry-hop, hippery bóp!
9. The long rise (wort), as in
Ănd one-two,
, and three-four!
(Harvey Gross in his book Sound and Form in Modern Poetry [Ann
Arbor, 1968] calls this rhythm the double iamb and discovers it
frequently in accentual-syllabic verse, where it substitutes for two
iambic feet. Robert Frost used it often in his worksee "Mending Wall"
below.)
Skeltonics, or "tumbling verse," is insistently rhymed dipodics. Turn
to John Skelton's "Justice Now" in the entry on saTrIcs for an example.
A scansion of the poem reveals a number of Tolkien's hemistichs. A
much more sophisticated use of podic prosody can be illustrated by
the first stanza of the following poem:
Bells for John Whiteside's Daughter
Thěre wăs such spéed - in hěr little body,
And such lightness • in her foorfall,
Te is no wonder • ber brown stidy
Astonishes us all.
-JOHN CROWE RANSOM

Page 24
This poem is an elegy. The first three lines of the stanza are dipodic
because there is a caesura in each line; otherwise, the lines would be
tetrapodic. The fourth line of each quatrain is tripodic, so this poem is
of mixed line-lengths. Note the long rises in the first and fourth
hemistichs, the rise-and-fall in the sixth, the promotion of the central
unstressed syllable in the first tripod. It is quite possible for a poet to
mixpodic line-lengths in a poemSkelton often does it in his tumbling
verse. If there were not a preponderance of dipods in Skelton's verse,
the specific prosody would have to be called variable podics (perhaps
it ought to be called so anyway).
Accentual-Syllabic Prosody
This metrical system counts both the number of stressed syllables in
the line and the number of unstressed syllables in the same line.
Moreover, the stressed syllables alternate more or less regularly in the
line of verse to create verse feet, which are also counted. There are
three specific accentual-syllabic prosodies: (1) normative, (2)
quantitative, and (3) variable.
Normative accentual-syllabics have a running foot (with variations), a
predominating verse foot in the lines of a poem, each of those lines
containing the same number of feet. The symbols indicating the breve
() and the ictus () have already been discussed. The macron (-) is the
same as the ictus and, like it, is placed above the stressed vowel. The
symbol for the secondary stress (•) appears over the stressed vowel;
the caesura (•) appears in the center of the line (in accentual-syllabic
verse of four to six feet, after the second or third verse foot). The foot
divider (|) separates verse feet. All these marks have been used
previously, but one other must be explained: the virgule (/) is a stroke
used to separate verses when they are written out like prose, not to
separate verse feet:

Page 25
In this passage, the stress on "O" is secondary, perhaps not even a
stress at all in comparison with the springing of "luve's like" and "red,
red rose." Even the second "red" is demoted because of its position as
the central syllable in a series of three stressed syllables. The effect of
these fourt lines, then, is:
lines
meters and rhymes
I.
xxxxxxxa
2.
xxxxxb
3.
********
4.
xxxxxb
In this schematic diagram, the rhyme scheme of the first quatrain
stanza is shown, but the caesurae have been taken out. The effect of
this passage is somewhat podic, but a count of the syllables will show
that lines one (1) and three (3) contain exactly eight syllables, and that
lines two (2) and four (4) contain exactly six. Furthermore, a recurring
stress pattern is evident in the corresponding line (one and three:
•vivu; two and four: .). The predominating foot, therefore, is an
iamb. All three elements are thus regularsyllable count in a line,
number of stressed syllables in a line, and number and kind of verse
feet in a line.
There are four standard verse feet in English prosody:
1. The iamb is a verse foot of two syllables, only the second being
stressed: -.
2. The anapest has three syllables, only the third of which is stressed:
vu'.
3. The trochee consists of two syllables, but the stress pattern of the
iamb is reversed: .
4. The dactyl is made of three syllables, but the stress pattern of the

Page 26
5. The headless iamb is a foot of one stressed syllable, as is the
6. tailless trochee: . One can tell these two feet apart only from their
position in a line of verse. They occur, for instance, when the
unstressed first syllable of an iamb is dropped as a variation in a line
of verse, or when the unstressed second syllable of a trochee is
dropped for the same reason.
7. The spondee is a foot of two syllables, both of which are stressed:
".
8. The amphibrach is a foot of three syllables, only the second of
which is stressed: «.
9. The double iamb is a foot of four syllables, the first two unstressed
and the second two stressed: vu. It equals two iambs in a line of
verse.
Classical prosodists would say that the double iamb is a combination
of two feet, the pyrrhic (u) and the spondee. The pyrrhic, however,
does not seem to appear elsewhere in English prosody, unless as a
variation in a trochaic poem that reverses the double iamb (.u)
, which
would substitute for two trochees and perhaps best be called a double
trochee.
Other classical feet do not apply to English prosody. An amphimacer
(.~.) is either a headless iamb and an iamb, or a trochee and a tailless
trochee. We know that the tribrach (y, three unstressed syllables,
cannot exist, for the middle syllable would be promoted. The reverse
occurs in the case of the molossus (.'), for the central syllable is
demoted. The bacchic. would be an iamb and a tailless trochee, and
the antibacchic (.Y) is a headless iamb and a trochee.
Variations in a line of English verse are important, for in normative

accentual-syllabic verse, it is variation against the pattern, and not
strict adherence to the pattern, that satisfies the ear. The poetaster (an
unskilled versifier) memorizes a pattern and works with it, whereas
the poet understands a pattern and works against it. Regularity of
meter is uninteresting; counterpointrhythm against the normative
beatis interesting. On the other hand, too much variation is
disconcerting and awkward.

Page 27
The name of the predominating foot, plus the standard prefixes
attached to the root "meter," identify the metric of normative
accentual-syllabics. For instance, the word "iambic" plus
"monometer" indicates that the length of the line is one (1) foot;
trochaic dimeter equals two (2) feet; anapestic trimeter equals three
(3) feet; dactylic tetrameter equals four (4) feet; iambic pentameter
equals five (5) feet, and so forth. This last line, iambic pentameter, is
the HEROIC LINE of English poetry. Any poem written in this line is HEROIC
VERSE, whether rhymed or unrhymed (see HEROICS).
The term blank merely means unrhymed metered verse. If any line of
accentual-syllabic verse is unrhymed, it is called BLANK VERsE; however,
this term usually is understood to mean the iambic pentameter line,
unless some other normative meter is specified. The terms blank verse
and free verse are often confused with one another. Free verse is
either prose or some unidentified prosody, such as variable accentuals,
and both can rhyme. The twentieth-century poet Ogden Nash made a
career of writing rhymed prose poems. Blank verse cannot rhyme.
Scansion is extremely important in accentual-syllabic verse. Scansion
describes a norm, not an absolute. Some lines of a particular iambic
pentameter poem, for instance, might not contain a single iamb, but
most will. Moreover, in most lines iambs will predominate. The first
four lines of Robert Frost's "Mending Wall" will serve as an example:
Something there is that doesn't love a wall,
That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it,
And spills the upper boulders in the sun,
And makes gaps even two can pass abreast.
The verse should be read naturally, like prose, letting the accents fall
as they will. Regular meters should not be forced upon the lines.
Furthermore, the poem should be read in sentences, not by the

Page 28
it appears in verse, should be responded to just as in prose.
After you have read the Frost poem aloud, listening to yourself as you
speak, the lines can be scanned by putting ictus marks or secondary
stress dots over those syllables that sound heavier than the others:
Something there is that doesn't love a wall,
That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it,
And spills the upper boulders in the sún,
And mákes gáps even two can páss abréast.
After this task has been done, the breve marks can be added over the
rest of the syllables:
Something thěre is thăt doesn t love ă wall,
That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it,
Ănd spills the uppěr boulders in thě sun,
And mákes gáps evěn two căn pass ăbreast.
When the scansion marks are isolated, the pattern looks like this:
٠باااي اي دي
اما+ ل الا م باب
Uruuut
This pattern shows the kind of foot that predominates ^,
, and if you
count the syllables in each line, the norm will be ten, or, in the first
line,
**********
Now you can divide the verse feet, one from the other:

Page 29
The predominant foot is iambic, so the verse is an iambic poem. There
are five feet in a line, therefore it is an iambic pentameter poem.
Furthermore, it is unrhymedan iambic pentameter, blank verse poem.
In line one (1) of the Frost poem, a trochee has been substituted for an
iamb in the first foot. In line two (2), there is a demotion in the first
syllable of the fourth foot and a secondary stress substituted for the
normal stress in the fifth foot. Line three (3) contains a promotion in
the second syllable of the fourth foot, and in line four (4), a trochee
has been substituted for an iamb in the second foot. Also in this latter
foot, a secondary stress stands in place of the unaccented syllable of
the trochee (a "descend," as in podic prosody).
Although one reader's scansion of this poem may differ from
another's, all readers will agree that the normative meter is iambic and
that the length of the line is pentameter. Pronunciation, including
stressing, varies from region to region, and individuals tend to put
more rhetorical emphasis on certain words; nevertheless, anyone with
a trained ear will hear the running foot.
The rest of Frost's poem will illustrate many of the other types of
variation possible; for instance, line eleven (11) begins with a double
iamb:
Bút ăt spring ménding-time wč find chěm thére.
Systems of variation are called counterpoint. The term acatalexis
designates a perfect line of accentual-syllabic verse. For instance, in
an iambic tetrameter poem, an acatalectic line will have eight
syllables and four stresses, the unaccented syllables alternating
regularly with the accented syllables:
"Toveyour hair thar way "'
shě said.

Page 30
A line is made catalectic by dropping a syllable from the end of the
line:
corriping memories of childhood"
If the dropped syllable is one that is stressed, the line will normally be
shortenedproducing a trimeter line. If the dropped syllable is
unstressed, the line is not shortened (see the previously mentioned
tailless trochee). Note the elision in "memories"pronounced mem'ries
(elision will be discussed later).
Dropping more than one syllable at the end of the line makes it
brachycatalectic. A line is made hypercatalectic by adding a syllable
at the end of the line:
Though minds have likened worlds co srage
If the syllable added is stressed, the line will be lengthened, unless the
stressed syllable is part of a spondaic foot (.).
A line is made acephalous (headless) by dropping unstressed syllables
from the beginning of the line (see the headless iamb discussed
previously):
Pampening our solitude,....
A line is made anacrustic by adding unaccented syllables to the
beginning of the line:
and ot youch must come t last to caters.
In effect, an anapest has been substituted for an iamb in the first foot.
Notice that this line is both anacrustic and hypercatalectic.
Quality refers to the substitution of one kind of verse foot for another;
specifically, the substitution of a verse foot that differs from the

normative meter of the line:
no Banes a turn tha really mates.
In this line, a spondee has been substituted for the normative iamb in
the first foot, and an amphibrach for the normative

Page 31
iamb in the last foot. Adding the stressed syllable as part of the
spondee has not lengthened the line, nor has the meter of the line been
changed through hypercatalexis. Notice the y-glide elision in really.
In English verse lines of four beats or longer, a natural caesuraonly a
brief hesitationoccurs often after the second or third stressed syllable:
we sought through rooms
for something warm.
Qualitative caesura is caused by manipulating measures through
substitution:
Mutually grapplěd, - wě ate thě fruit—
Notice the substitution of a dactyl for the normative iamb in the first
foot, and of a trochee in the second foot. The normative meter
resumes in the third foot, and the caesura occurs where two
unaccented syllables come together. Note the w-glide elision in
mutually.
Punctuational caesura is caused by punctuation placed somewhere in
the center of the line to indicate phrasing:
ios skin and coreand quatied Resh deeply..
Compensatory caesura occurs when the caesura compensates for a
missing syllable dropped from the center of a line:
corrupting mémories of childhood, ...
Compensation occurs when a missing half-foot or larger unit in one
line is made up for with an extra unit added to the same line or to a
preceding or following line:
corrúpting mémories
of chilakood,

Page 32
Semi-cloture takes place when the end of the line coincides with the
end of a phrase or clause:
Mutually grappled, we ate the fruit
its skin and coreand quaffed flesh deeply O
dampening our solitude O...
Enjambment is the opposite of cloture: lines run on. Grammatic
enjambment is the running on of a sentence, without pause, from one
line or stanza to the next:
the tragicomic masks of age›
Cand youth must come at last to tatters.
Metrical enjambment takes place when, in effect, half the verse foot
belonging to a following line occurs at the end of the preceding line:
the tragicomic masks of age›
Cand youth must come at last to tatters.
It can perhaps be seen more easily like this:
ses skin and core
-ănd quaffed flesh déeply,
dampěning our solitude,.
The reverse can also take placehalf the verse foot belonging to a
preceding line is added to the beginning of the following line. Here is
the complete poem:
Party Game
"I love your hair that way," she said.
We sought through rooms for something warm
enough. We tested miles of bed,
Lay on an open moor that spread
beyond fourposters and the dawn.

Page 33
corrupting memories of childhood,
slipping into age too steeply.
"It's not the way I thought it was,"
she said. So I was Adam damned
again for female niches and flaws.
Thus, we deserted mattress moors,
returned, wise now, to parlor games.
And spin the bottle all our days
no game's a turn that really matters.
Though minds have likened worlds to stages,
the tragicomic masks of age,
and of youth, must come at last to tatters.
L. T.
Elision is the blending of two or more syllable sounds so that they
become one syllable sound. There are various ways of eliding:
1. Vocalic elisionRobert Bridges in his book Milton's Prosody
(Oxford, 1893) describes vocalic elision. "When two vowel sounds
come together, then if the first of the two has a tail-glide (a y-glide or
a w-glide), there may be elision." Some examples of y-glide are
flying, so be it, the others, thee and she and all, glory above, and riot.
Some examples of w-glide are ruinous, so often, also in, Morocco or
Trebisond, followers (foll'wers), shadowy (shad'wy), gradual,
influence.
2. Semi-vocalic elisionBridges suggests in his book that, "If two
unstressed vowels be separated by r, there may be elision." Donald
Justice, in his samizdat notes Of Prosody (Lowa City, 1960), adds,
"This applies also to 1 and n and perhaps may be extended to m."
Some examples are murmuring (murm'ring), pillar of state (pillar 'f

state), caroler (car'ler), and begotten and (begot'n and).
3. Overt elisionIn certain kinds of obsolete poetic diction, overt elision
(as in the parenthetical examples just above) occurs where the writer
indicates what has been elided by means of punctuation. Other kinds
of overt elision are in everyday use, as in don't, can't, would've, and so
forth.
4. Consonantal silenceBridges says, "H is often considered as no
letter," as in ought to have (ought to 'ave or ought to've, where

Page 34
the following vowel is also suppressed: I've, you'vesee vocalic
suppression below). Other consonants are sometimes silent as well, as
in often (of'en or of'n).
5. Consonantal suppressionJustice says, "Final m and n are very
frequently not counted anyhow, as chasm or heaven [heav'n]." Vocalic
suppression. Justice continues, "The words evil [ev'l] and spirit [spir't]
have also been taken in English verse to have but one syllable."
Vocalic suppression sometimes takes place after a silent consonant as
well, as in ought to've and of'n.
6. Counter-elision"In contrast," Justice says, "fire [fi-er] often is
counted as two [syllables in length]." The same is true for other
wordshire, mire, lyreand in many dialects words are pronounced as
though they had more syllables than usualrepair (repay-er; see section
on dialect rhyme that follows).
7. Option"Elision in most of these words," Justice says, "is optional;
that is, the word need not be elided each time it occurs, even if it
occurs twice in the same line." The same is true of counter-elision.
When we were considering the Robert Burns stanza, we noted that the
lines were of different lengths:
A Red, Red Rose
O, my luve's like a red, red rose,
That's newly sprung in June:
O, my luve's like the melodie
That's sweetly played in tune.
As fair art thou, my bonie lass,
So deep in luve am I:
And I will luve thee still, my dear,
Till a' the seas gang dry.

Page 35
And I will come again, my luve,
Tho' it were ten thousand mile.
ROBERT BURNS
You might suppose that these differing line-lengths indicate that this
poem is quantitative verse, by analogy with quantitative syllabics and
quantitative accentuals, but this assumption would not be correct. This
poem is normative accentual-syllabics because there is a running foot:
all the lines are iambic, only their lengths differ. The first and third
lines of each stanza are tetrameter, the second and fourth are trimeter,
and that is how the poem must be described.
The prosody of the classical Greeks depended upon a system in which
each syllable was assigned its particular length or duration, much as
notes in a musical scale can be eighth notes, quarter notes, half notes,
or whole notes. Some English poets, particularly in the Renaissance,
experimented with quantitative accentual-syllabics, assigning to
English syllables specific lengths. None of these experiments was
successful. English intonations remained basically strong-stress, and
no quantitative codification of stress, duration, pitch, or intonation
ever took place.
The one thing that did take hold in English poetics, however, was the
nomenclature of the Greek verse feetthese names were applied (in
fact, misapplied) to English stress prosody when accentual-syllabic
prosody was being rediscovered in the sixteenth century.
As we have seen, the ancient English prosody, introduced by the
Anglo-Saxons from Scandinavia, was strong-stress accentual verse.
Before the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes, the literary language of England
was classical Latin, which had been introduced by the occupying
Romans and reintroduced by the Roman Catholic Church. Latin verse
imitated classical Greek prosody, but the native singers of England

Page 36
tual prosody and syllabic prosody lived side-by-side for centuries in
Britain without influencing one another.
In 1066, however, the Norman French invaded England and brought
with them the French syllabic prosody. The Normans were the same
race as the Anglo-Saxonsboth were "Northmen"but the former had
been acculturated to French civilization. For several centuries, then,
until about 1300 or so, the official literary language of Great Britain
was French. The conquerors wrote poetry in French syllabics, while
the Englishmen continued to write in alliterative accentuals.
Gradually, the two languages merged. The Germanic Old English lost
many of its endings and inflections and adopted many French words.
The result was that Old English and French became Middle English.
Enter Geoffrey Chaucer, John Gower, and some others who were
confronted with a problem. The prosodic tradition in which they had
been educated was Norman French, and the French do not believe
there are accents, except occasionally, in their tongue; therefore, they
are prevented from accounting for stresses and must count only
syllables, if they are to count anything. (If the French count nothing,
they believe they write vers libre or "free verse," a term that, when it
was accepted into American poetic terminology early in this century,
caused as much confusion about what constituted prose and verse as it
has done in France.)
The English Chaucerians, however, could hear the stresses of Middle
English, and they felt they could not ignore the English half of their
heritage. They therefore invented accentual-syllabic prosody, counting
all syllables, stressed syllables, and, in effect, verse feet, though they
had no names for such things.
With the death of Chaucer and Gower about 1400, poets generally
forgot about accentual-syllabics. The Scots, however, kept the

Page 37
way back to strong-stress verse and wrote their folk ballads in podic
prosody.
A century later (about 1500), John Skelton was writing in both podics
and accentual-syllabics. Some critics consider Skelton to be the last
English Medieval poet, others think of him as the first Renaissance
poet. He was both. His successors rediscovered Chaucer's prosody,
looked around for names to apply to the measures they discovered,
and used the Greek terms that were at hand during that age of
discovery and rediscovery.
They also began writing an approximation of classical quantitative
prosody. They preassigned kinds and numbers of verse feet in a line
in a particular order. SappHics will serve as an example. A Sapphic line
contains two trochees, followed by a dactyl, followed by two trochees.
In a Sapphic stanza, which is a quatrain, there are three such lines
followed by an Adonic line, which is a dactyl followed by a trochee.
Here is one Sapphic line followed by one adonic:
Visitor, you've come ănd hăve gone while i wăs...
dárkling with questions.
For this whole poem, see "Visitor" in my Poetry: An Introduction
Through Writing (Reston, Va., 1973). For other sapphic poems (and
examples of many of the forms to be found here), see Strong
Measures, edited by Philip Dacey and David Jauss (New York, 1986).
I shall have many occasions to refer to these books, and to Alberta
Turner's Poets Teaching (New York, 1980), in the ensuing pages.
Variable accentual-syllabics mixes line-lengths, although there is a
running foot. An example is the first strophe of William Wordsworth's
"Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early
Childhood." The small letters to the right of the poem indicate the

Page 38
There wasa ime when meadow, grove, and stream,
Thě earth nd every common sight,
To mé dia séem
Ăppareled in'elestil light,
Thě glory and the freshness ofă dréam.
Te is not now as it hath been of yore—
Tum whéreso er i may,
By night or day,
Thě things which i häve séen i now căn see nă
more.
45
In this poem, the normative meter is constant (with some variations),
but the line-lengths and rhyming pattern are random.
The general form of this poem is the ode, as indicated by its title. An
ode is a solemn poem written to celebrate an occasion. Although there
are set forms for the ode, this particular example does not follow
either a poem-form or a stanza-form; it therefore has no specific form.
As we have noted, the Celtic forms are syllabic; however, certain of
them specify that stressed syllables appear in certain places. For
instance, in the Irish DElBrIDe, a quatrain stanza, it is a requirement that
the last syllable in line one (1) and line three (3) be stressed. Thus,
though the main metric is syllabic, there is also an accentual
component. Such verse must logically be called syllabic-accentuals.
Invented Prosodies
The English language has borrowed and absorbed so much from other
languages and cultures that there are limitless possibilities for
invention within it. For instance, it is pos-

Page 39
sible to postulate a prosody based upon counting only unstressed
syllables in a line of verse, paying no attention to the stressed
syllables, of which there might be any number. Although this moraic
prosody would look and read like prose, it would in fact be a verse
prosody.
Proportion in Rhyme
There are various kinds of rhyme and other devices for making words
chime against one another. Some have already been discussed,
including alliteration and cynghanedd. True rhyme has to do with the
identical sound, in two or more words, of an accented vowel (ó-ó-ó ›
as well as of all the sounds following that vowel (one - ban - own?, while
the consonantal sounds immediately preceding the vowel differ in
each word (bone- loan - shown)
End rhyme rhymes line endings:
One science only will one genius fit;
So vast is art, so narrow human wit.
ALEXANDER POPE from Essay on Criticism
Falling rhyme (feminine rhyme) means a rhyming of lines of verse
with falling meters or feminine endings:
fálling - cálling
Falling rhythms begin with an accented syllable and end with an
unaccented syllable. Dactyls and trochees are falling meters. Rising
rhyme (masculine rhyme) is a rhyming of lines of verse with rising
meters or masculine endings:
arisc - despise.
Rising rhythms begin with an unaccented syllable and end with an
accented syllable. Anapests and iambs are rising meters. Light rhyme

Page 40
Internal rhyme rhymes the ending of a line with a word in the center
of the same line, usually with a syllable just before the caesura, as in
the third line of the following quatrain from "The Man in the Man-
Made Moon":
Coal black is the raven, coal black is the rook,
Coal black is the shark in the billow.
Where I once had a Bill • to drive back my chill
There's a cold blackeyed pea on my pillow.
X.J. KENNEDY
Linked rhyme rhymes the last syllable or syllables of a line with the
first syllable or syllables of the following line (The bell is heard, and
the song is sung / Flung upon the morning air). Interlaced rhyme
rhymes a syllable or syllables in the center of a line with a syllable or
syllables in the center of the preceding or following line (The song is
sung, and the bell is heard / It is flung upon the air). Cross rhyme
rhymes an ending with a sound at the center of the preceding or
following line (The bell is heard, and the song is sung; / The sound is
flung on the morning air).
Head rhyme rhymes syllables at the beginnings of lines of verse (Sung
is the song of the ringing bell / flung upon the morning air).
Apocopated rhyme drops one or more syllables from the ending of one
of a pair of rhyming words (The bells were ringing on the morn- / ing
that the song of the sun was born). Enjambed rhyme uses the first
consonant of the following line to complete the sound of the rhyme
(He found the stair, and he / descended to find the seed).
Single rhymes are rhymes of one syllable (morn - born); double
rhymes, of two syllables (singing - ringing), and triple rhymes of three
syllables (intending - descending). Compound rhyme treats groups of
words as though they were one-word rhymes, as in the poem

Page 41
A nurserymaid is not afraid of what you people call work,
So I made up my mind to go as a kind of piratical maid-of-all-
work
Mosaic rhyme uses one compound ending and one normal ending in a
rhyme, illustrated here from the same song and source:
And that is how you find me now, a member of your shy lot,
Which you wouldn't have found, had he been bound apprentice
to a pilot.
Trite rhyme is the rhyming of words that have been overused for
rhymes. Joyce Kilmer's "Trees" is an easily found model of many of
the trite rhymes in the English language. Popular songs are another
source of reference. It is possible for trite rhymes to be used in
original and interesting ways, however, for much of their triteness has
to do with their contextual use.
Omoioteleton is a classical term that covers the various types of
rhyme other than true rhyme. Rich rhyme (rime riche, false rhyme)
has identical sound in the consonants immediately preceding the
accented vowel as well as in the sounds following it (cyst, persist, insist). It
is really a form of repetition rather than rhyme. Consonance (meaning
"like-sounds"not to be confused with consonants) has also been called
slant rhyme, off-rhyme, and near-rhyme. It substitutes similar sound
for identical sound (bridge, hedge, gouge, rage, rouge). Consonance assumes that
all vowel sounds are interchangeable with one another, as are certain
related consonant sounds such as the soft g in "gouge" and "rage," the
harder dg of "bridge" and "hedge," and the zh sound of "rouge." The
verb form of the noun is "to consonate."
Analyzed rhyme is a system Edward Davison described in his book
Some Modern Poets (New York, 1928): "[He] takes two such words
as soon and hide but separates the vowel from the consonantal sounds

Page 42
oo of soon is united with the d of hide; and the i of hide with the n of
soon. This simple analysis produces the [four] rhyming sounds
oon ine
ide
ood
as a basis for new sets of words. Thus, by means of analyzed rhyme,
an absolute sound relationship can be established among words that
have hitherto seemed alien to each other." Words that might use the
sounds presented above would be moon, divine, chide, and brood. See
"Winter" in the entry on the quAtrain for an example of a poem that
uses analyzed rhyme.
Wrenched rhyme is as much pun as anything else. It twists words to
make rhymes, as Ogden Nash did in his prose poem titled "Kindly
Unhitch That Star, Buddy": "Some people think they will eventually
wear diamonds instead of rhinestones / Only by everlastingly keeping
their noses to their ghrinestones, ... " Amphisbaenic rhyme is
"backward" rhyme; that is, words are either spelled backward (see
orthographical schemas in chapter 5) or pronounced backward (later -
retail, stop - pots, Potsdam - madstop, pets - instep). Lyon rime,
described by George Puttenham in his The Arte of English Poesie
(1589; reprint edition, Kent, Ohio, 1970) is really not rhyme at all,
though it is a form of repetition. It is, in fact, a constructional schema
(see chapter 5). Some verses are written that, when read backward
word for word beginning with the last word, say exactly the opposite
of what the verses originally said, as in this quatrain by Wesli Court:
"One in heat can love cool"
Believe, and remain her fool.
Fool her. Remain, and believe

Page 43
(eight - sleight, ties - homilies). Dialect rhyme is often difficult to
distinguish from sight rhyme. People from different places, or from
different eras ("historical rhyme"'), might pronounce the same word
differently; that is, one person will pronounce "again" so that it
rhymes with "pain," but another person will rhyme it with "pen."
Echo has to do with the reappearance of identical sounds or with the
appearance of similar sounds. For instance, parimion, the classical
term for alliteration (which has already been discussed) is the
repetition of stressed initial consonant sounds in a series of words.
Note that the stressed sound must be the first syllable in the word, not
a second or later syllable (He rucked in his runic and fore it ferribly).
Assonance repeats identically stressed vowel sounds anywhere in a
word (The cát was indefatigable in its attáck on the rát) Consonantal echo has
to do with the repetition of consonants, both stressed and unstressed,
whether at the beginnings of words or elsewhere, and not necessarily
in sequence:
If she were alive he'd love her still.
Vocalic echo is the repetition of vowels, both stressed and unstressed,
whether at the beginnings of words or elsewhere:
If she were allve he' d ike her sell.
Cynghanedd, a system incorporating rhyme, alliteration, assonance,
and vocalic and consonantal echo, has been discussed earlier in these
pages.
Onomatopoeia "describes" something through sound, the sonics of the
passage imitating the subject (The seashore roared from the seashell's
horn). Euphony is a mingling of pleasant sounds, usually including all
vowels and certain consonants: soft c, f, soft g, h, j, 1, m, n, r, S, V, W,

Page 44
Repetition refers to the reappearance of sounds, words, phrases, and
lines. A repeton is a single line or phrase repeated once after its initial
appearance in a poem. A repetend is a single line or phrase that
reappears more than once after its initial appearance, but at random. A
refrain is a single phrase or line that reappears at formal intervals
throughout a poem, usually at the end of each stanza. A burden is
similar to a refrain, except that it consists of a couplet or something
larger. A chorus is a whole stanza that appears at intervals during the
progress of the poem. Incremental repetition is a repeton, repetend,
refrain, burden, or chorus with at least one word changed each time it
reappears, so that the line takes on greater significance as the poem
moves toward a climax. Folk ballads, such as "Lord Randal," and
nursery rhymes, such as "Robbin to Bobbin," illustrate various
techniques of repetition. For discussions of these two poems, see my
Poetry: An Introduction (op. cit.).
Proportion has to do with various kinds of balance in a poem.
Proportion by situation of rhyme has to do with the arrangement of
rhymes in a stanza by distance. First distance is couplet rhyme (aa;
second distance is triplet rhyme (aba); third distance is envelope
stanza quatrain (abba); fourth distance is quintet envelope, where the
rhyme leaps three lines of b rhyme (abbba) or a triplet rhyme (abcba).
Proportion by situation of measures is concerned with variations in
lengths of lines in a stanza; that is, the patterns of long and short lines.
An example is found in the stanza called STANDARD HABBIE, where the lines
are sometimes of four feet, sometimes of two feet (the numerals here
indicate length-of-line): a4a4a4b2a4b2.
Proportion in figure has to do with the typographical levelchoosing
the appropriate stanza shape to suit the poem. Often lines of the same
length will be indented or will start at the margin. Similarly, the poet

might or might not indent, according to the rhyme scheme.
Capitalizing the initial letters of lines is also an option. Proportion by
treatment means choosing the appropriate meters, forms, and lengths
(both

Page 45
of lines and of the whole poem) to deal with the subject and theme of
the poem.
Notation
Notation deals with the shorthand recordings of the rhyme schemes
and line-lengths in poems. The first rhyme sound of a poem is always
noted as a, and whenever that rhyme sound reappears, it is again
recorded as a. The second rhyme is b, the third, c, and so on. The
numerals above the small letters (a4) indicate length-of-line (in this
case, four verse feet).
When a line is used as a refrain, the first refrain will, if it is also the
first rhyme, be noted with a capital letter A, the second refrain, if the
second rhyme, will be capital B, and so forth. If there are two refrains
in the poem with the same rhyme, they are differentiated by numerals:
A1bA2, as in the villanelle, for instance. If you wish to indicate line-
lengths as well, a second numeral will indicate line-length, the first
indicating the refrain (see the pantoum, which is built entirely of
repeated lines).
A particular system of metrical notation was developed for, and
copyrighted in, The Book of Forms (New York, 1960), and it is
retained here. The schematic diagrams that appear beneath most of the
prose descriptions of the various poetic forms, lines, and stanza
patterns in Part II are designed to present visually (1) the number of
syllables in each line of verse; (2) the number of accents in each line;
(3) the rhyme schemes; and (4) the positions of rhymed and unrhymed
refrains and repetitions. For these reasons, the traditional method of
scansion is not used, and the following symbols should be noted:
xSmall x stands for an unrhymed syllable that is
either unaccented or whose accent is unimportant.

Page 46
•
An accent mark stands for an accent (stress).
Stands for an unrhymed, accented syllable.
a, b,Small letters other than x stand for rhymes.
c...
i, b, c.... Small accented letters other than x stand for
stressed rhymed syllables.
A, B,1. In the Welsh and Irish forms, capital letters
C...stand for main rhymes.
2. In the French forms, capital letters (except
R) indicate rhymed refrains that are whole
lines or repetons.
RIn some French forms, R indicates a refrain
that consists of only a part of a line.
A1, Numbered capital letters indicate sequence of
B1,refrains; see the example of the PANToUM.
A2,
B2
orIn certain Welsh forms, "or" indicates a
syllable or word that consonates (off-rhyming
or slant-rhyming).
oe, ay,In certain Welsh forms, grouped letters (other
ei ...than exes and or) indicate dipththong rhymes.
с, xc,In certain Irish forms, a small c used alone or
bc.. grouped with other letters indicates
consonance, not rhyme.

xx,Otherwise, grouped letters indicate a word
xax,consisting of that many syllables.
xxxb
xx a xIn the Welsh and Irish forms, italicized
syllables indicate possible positions for
rhymes, cross-rhymes, assonances, or
alliterations.
Although these symbols might seem confusing out of context, they
will become immediately clear when you consult the schematic
diagrams themselves. There will be certain exceptions to these
notation rules, but in each case the exceptions will be apparent and
will be stated in the heading for each form.

Page 47
4
The Sensory Level
A trope is a "figure of speech": certain language constructions present
figures to the eye, to the ear, to the other senses, and these
representations appeal to the inner "sense" of emotion. A trope makes
a mind-picture; it is descriptive in nature.
Descriptive Tropes
Descriptions are simple tropes, but not all tropes are descriptions. In
fact, the most effective figures of speech are more complex than
adjectives and adjective phrases modifying nouns (pretty girl, kettle of
fish), or adverbs and adverbial constructions modifying adjectives
(very pretty), verbs (run fast) or other adverbs (jump really high).
Heightened language uses few modifiers but many tropes of a more
sophisticated and effective kind.
Hypotiposis is the description of real things; pragmatographia is the
description of actions; topographia is description of real places;
chronographia is description of seasons, times of day, and so forth.
Icon is word portraiture. Prosopographia is description of a person
one has never knownimaginative portraiture. Enigma is a deliberately
obscure description, as in a riddle.
A neologism is a coined word, one invented by a particular writer. An
epithetic compound is two descriptive words made into
one"deathgush," "thickdark," "sunbright," and so forth. One form of
the epithetic compound is the portmanteau word of Lewis Carroll,
which combines parts of two different words; for instance, "slithy" is
made out of lithe and

Page 48
slimy. Carroll intended the overtones or associations the reader has
with both words to continue being present in the new word. A kenning
is a brief metaphorical synonym; for instance, "the whale's road"
equals the ocean. Kennings are a prominent feature of Anglo-Saxon
stress verse poetry. An oxymoron is a descriptive phrase that
combines terms that seem mutually exclusive but, in context, are
not"sweet bitterness," "terrible beauty," "burning chill," and so forth.
Similetic Tropes
Omiosis is examination by similarity: two things in some way
resemble each other. Comparisons examine similar things: Her smile
was like the sun, as warm as morning light upon the rose.
Analogy is the means by which simile proceeds: comparing things that
are not identical (He stood as if he were an oak braced against the
wind). In this example, "He" is the subject of the simile, and "oak" is
the analogue, the trope that bears the weight of the comparison.
Contrast examines different things: (The lake was no more a mirror
than the sky is a pancake).
Allusion is comparison by reference to something outside the poem, or
to something not organically a part of the poem (He came, like Rome,
to see, and stayed to conquer).
Parabola is resemblance by imagery, talking about one thing in terms
of something entirely different in kind. Yeats used parabola in "Crazy
Jane and the Bishop" when Crazy Jane says, "But a birchtree stood
my Jack: / The solid man and the coxcomb."
Metaphorical Tropes
The nature of allegory is to speak about one subject in terms of
another, allowing the subject to become new again, making it clearer

Page 49
have a story about an ugly duckling. Corresponding to the narrative
level at every point is the symbolic levelwhat we are really talking
aboutin this case, an ugly child without a doubt. The moral is, "You
will grow up to be a beautiful adult, just like the ugly duckling who
turned into a swan." There is even an implied extension of the moral
in this story: "You will outstrip the ordinary people who laugh at you
now."
No matter how much a substantive or verb is qualified by means of
modifiers, it remains essentially unchanged. Metaphor changes a word
essentially by making it equivalent to something else, something
different: "The sun and moon are coins to be spent lightly or in dark
ways." In this example, the language equation is sun + moon = coins.
A metaphor that is extended beyond the original equation is called a
conceit (an obsolete spelling for the word "concept"). In our example,
the conceit following the equation consists of to be spent (like money,
like time, lightly (a pun, meaning "in a carefree way" or "without
much thought," at the same time continuing the metaphor of sunlight
or day light), and in dark ways (in ways that are hopeless or
despairing, perhaps also evoking nighttime).
The tenor is the subject of a metaphor; it is the thing being talked
about. The object of a metaphor is called the vehicle; it is the trope
that bears the weight of the equation between the two things or
qualities that, nevertheless, have a point or points in common. Sun and
moon are the compound tenor of our example; coins is the vehicle.
Roundness is the perceived point in common between coins and sun
and moon. Extended points in common, implied by the context of our
equation, are that the day's coin, the sun, is golden, and that the night's
coin, the moon, is silver.
Sometimes the subject about which we wish to speak is an abstract

Page 50
"God," "love"). A concrete noun is any substantive that can be
conventionally defined (e.g., table, brick, rug, tree, elephant, house).
An anchored abstraction is an abstract noun metaphorized by being
equated with a concrete noun that, thus, defines it: "Her heart is a
stone." Denotation is the primary meaning or dictionary definition of
a word: "Heart. A bodily organ, the purpose of which is to circulate
the blood." Connotation is an ancillary or secondary meaning of a
word. Connotations of heart are courage, as in "He has great heart";
love, as in "An affair of the heart"; and essence, as in "He is pure of
heart."
Context is the environment in which a word is situated in a phrase,
clause, or larger grammatical unit. This environment limits the
denotations and connotations of the word. In "Her heart is a stone,"
we understand that she is hard-hearted, an idiomatic expression
meaning without pity. In "His heart beat strongly in battle," the
context of the word heart allows the denotation a bodily organ and the
connotation courage, but it eliminates the other connotations of love
and essence.
Overtone is this allowance of connotations by context. In "The sun
and moon are coins to be spent lightly, or in dark ways," context
allows the denotation of carefreeness in "lightly," as well as the
connotation of "brightness"and thereby "gold"through overtone
created by a subdued metaphor (metaphor implied, not stated, by the
context). Overtone amplifies meaning, thereby making it ambiguous
and inclusive but not obscure.
Obscurity blocks meanings, as when a poet refers to one abstraction in
terms of anotheran unanchored abstraction. Keats' "Beauty is truth,
truth beauty, that is all / Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know,"
the last two lines of his "Ode on a Grecian Urn," is an unanchored

abstraction. It means nothing, or, rather, it means anything the reader
wishes it to mean. It is not a metaphor because there is no discernible
point in common between the two abstractions, and there is no way to
tell which abstract noun is the tenor

Page 51
and which the vehicle. Fortunately, the rest of the poem provides a
context for these lines that gives the reader a feeling for what the poet
might have been talking about, at least as far as "beauty" is concerned
if not for "truth."
A poem can be exclusive or inclusive. The poet can build contexts that
limit meanings severely or, instead, that amplify the poem through
overtone and symbology. A symbol is a concretion that represents an
abstraction, for example, in some contexts, the ocean is symbolic of
eternity. An emblem is a conventional symbol (a bald eagle is
emblematic of the United States of America). William Empson, in his
book Seven Types of Ambiguity (New York, 1955), listed ambiguities
that can add to the inclusive quality of a poem:
First type ambiguities arise when a detail is effective in several ways at
once, e.g., by comparisons with several points of likeness, antitheses with
several points of difference, "comparative" adjectives, subdued metaphors,
and extra meanings suggested by rhythm.
Second type ambiguities arise when two or more alternative meanings are
fully resolved into one.
Third type ambiguities arise when two apparently unconnected meanings
are given simultaneously.
Fourth type ambiguities arise when the alternative meanings combine to
make clear a complicated state of mind in the author.
Fifth type ambiguities arise when [there is] a fortunate confusion, as when
the author is discovering his idea in the act of writing ... or not holding it
all at once.
Sixth type ambiguities arise when what is said is contradictory or
irrelevant and the reader is forced to invent interpretations. [This, in fact, is
obscurity, not ambiguity.]
Seventh type ambiguities [occur when there is] full contradiction, marking

a division in the author's mind.
For more discussion of overtone, see the entry on the HAIKU.
Besides those metaphoric constructions already named, there are (1)
synesthesia, talking about one of the senses in terms of another: "The
afternoon smelled blue" (scent-sight), "I could taste her sweet
whispers" (taste-hearing), "He touched me with his mind" (touch-
thought); (2) dimin-

Page 52
ishing metaphor, which has a deliberately overintense or overstated
tenor in relation to its vehicle: "The burning moon that she remembers
/ Was but a brand of dying embers"; (3) organic metaphor, which
rises logically from the context; (4) gratuitous metaphor, which does
not logically arise from the context; and (5) dyfalu, a Welsh term that
describes a tenor that bursts into a profusion of vehicles (in other
words, a catalog vehicle): "The moon was a coin, a ring of fire, / A
cartwheel rolling across the sky, / A heaven full of lightning turning /
Around the earth, a cosmic pyre." Additionally, paradox is an
antithetical metaphor or statement that combines terms that seem
mutually exclusive (see the aforementioned oxymoron) but, in fact,
are not: "Freedom is the prison of rebellion," or "Winter is the spring
of contemplation." Paradox can also be a statement that contradicts a
commonly held belief: "The earth is not round, it is egg-shaped."
The final metaphoric construction is called prosopopeia. Prosopopeia
is personification, speaking of nonhuman things in human terms, as
Keats does in his "Ode to Autumn," where fall is referred to as the
"Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun." The pathetic fallacy is
absurd or overstated personificationendowing nonhuman things with
bathetic or pathetic qualities, often through cue words (such as apple
pie, motherhood, love, truth, beauty, teddy bear, etc.) that our culture
has conditioned us to respond to automatically. Such words are meant
to induce unthinking sentimental responses in the reader. In the
phrase, "The little white cloud that cried," little, cloud, and cried are
cues. Similarly, in Joyce Kilmer's "Trees" the undiscriminating reader
will simultaneously see the tree as a mother figure, an infant figure,
and a religious figure. Some thought, however, will bring all the
images together logically and come up with the image of a monster
with hair for leaves, eyes on stalks tangled in the hair, a mouth at the
bottom of an elongated head buried in the earth, and so forth. If too

Page 53
placed upon the nonhuman vehicle of a metaphor, the pathetic fallacy
is likely to occur. To say, "I cried like a little white cloud" is one
thing, but to lose sight of the tenor "I" and say, "The little white cloud
cried" is another: inanimate objects cannot cry.
The term catachresis implies the misuse of tropes. Every poem must
make "sense"not necessarily logical sense, but poetic sense in context.
If a metaphor or other trope simply makes no "sense" of any kindfor
instance, where the context does not block out enough connotations,
causing confusion about what a word means (at which point,
ambiguity becomes obscurity then the trope is catachretic. A mixed
metaphor is catachretic because its vehicle is inappropriate to the
tenor (The sun and moon are baby buggies) or because the vehicle
itself is made up of inappropriate elements (Keep your nose to the
grindstone, your shoulder to the wheel, and an eye peeled for trouble).
Traditional Uses of Tropes
There are various traditions for using descriptions, similes, and
metaphors. Symbolism uses archetypes, or those universal symbols
for the great basic drives and abstract concepts of human existence.
An archetype is the original thing from which a copy is made. Some
psychoanalysts, including Carl Jung, believe that certain myths are
genetically transmitted from generation to generation through the
"collective unconscious," or race memory. To use the archetypal
symbol, the poet must find the key to those memories, not through
logic, but through what T. S. Eliot called the objective correlativethe
object or word that, in and of itself, produces the image of the idea in
the reader. The idea is not stated; rather, the poet proceeds by
intuition, choosing words that, like incantations or charms, conjure up
from the blood those feelings, mysteries, and terrors that have been
represented through various symbols since man became man.

Page 54
the symbols vary from epoch to epoch, they remain the same at their
core, they remain the archetypes, the ancient prototypes of elemental
mystery:
The Tyger
Tyger! Tyger! burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Could frame thy fearful symmetry?
In what distant deeps or skies
Burnt the fire of thine eyes?
On what wings dare he aspire?
What the hand dare seize the fire?
And what shoulder, & what art,
Could twist the sinews of thy heart?
And when thy heart began to beat,
What dread hand? & what dread feet?
What the hammer? what the chain?
In what furnace was thy brain?
What the anvil? what dread grasp
Dare its deadly terrors clasp?
When the stars threw down their spears,
And water'd heaven with their tears,
Did he smile his work to see?
Did he who made the Lamb make thee?
Tyger! Tyger! burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Could frame thy fearful symmetry?
WILLIAM BLAKE
Impressionism uses images to create moods; surrealism distorts

Page 55
vehicle. Metaphysical poetry is really metaphorical poetry, and it
proceeds by using the extended metaphor, the conceit:
The Sun Rising
Busy old fool, unruly Sun,
Why dost thou thus,
Through windows, and through curtains, call on us?
Must to thy motions lovers' seasons run?
Saucy pedantic wretch, go chide
Late school-boys and sour prentices,
Go tell court-huntsmen that the king will ride,
Call country ants to harvest offices;
Love, all alike, no season knows nor clime,
Nor hours, days, months, which are the rags of time.
Thy beams so reverend and strong
Why shouldst thou think?
I could eclipse and cloud them with a wink,
But that I would not lose her sight so long.
If her eyes have not blinded thine,
Look, and tomorrow late tell me.
Whether both th' Indias of spice and mine
Be where thou left'st them, or lie here with me.
Ask for those kings whom thou saw'st yesterday,
And thou shalt hear, "All here in one bed lay."
She's all states, and all princes I;
Nothing else is.
Princes do but play us; compared to this,
All honor's mimic, all wealth alchemy.
Thou, Sun, art half as happy as we,
In that the world's contracted thus;
Thine age asks ease, and since thy duties be
To warm the world, that's done in warming us.
Shine here to us, and thou art everywhere;

Page 56
Rhetorical Tropes
Rhetoric is the art of effective speaking and writing; it creates an
effect in the listener and affects him as well. Some tropes are called
rhetorical tropes because they create their effects through
nonmetaphorical figures of speech. In the examples given below, an
asterisk (*) marks those passages taken from Wesli Court's dipodic
satire of contemporary poetry, Odds Bodkin's Strange Thrusts and
Ravels, found in my Poetry: An Introduction (op. cit.).
Anachinosis refers the reader, in an argument, to his own opinion:
Odds wishes you godspeed,
sirs. Go out and read
if you believe not
this rave and riot.
Pick up a book, buy it,
peruse itthen, once you have done,
use it as best it suits you.*
Antenagoge makes a statement, then softens it by adding a mitigating
or less harsh alternative (I wish, my dear, that you'd fall over dead /
Well, maybe just fall down and hit your head).
Antiphrasis is derision by means of simple contradiction; for example,
calling a fat man "skinny" or a thin man "fatso."
Antipophora is asking a question, then answering it oneself, for
instance, when a scarecrow asks a field full of pumpkins, "You
worship me? a pole for a spine, a / timber for my extended bone,
fingers / of hay stolen by wrens?" he answers himself, "I bleach and
shake, / I shudder in the moon's dark. Pumpkins, crowd of orange
globes, I whistle in the wind."

Antitheton is the term for the technique of becoming "the devil's
advocate" in argument: taking any position and defending it simply
for the joy of a fight, or to bring out some point that might otherwise
remain unexamined.
Aporia expresses doubt or uncertainty.
Apostrophe is direct addressspeaking to an absent human being or to a
(usually) personified thing or abstraction, as Keats does in the "Ode to
Autumn."

Page 57
Asteismus is simple jesting, without rancor (Dia Samson Agonistes
have the strength / Of twenty bulls at cowtime in the spring?).
Charientismus is light banter meant to soothe rancor.
Dialisis sets up the propositions of an argument. These propositions
are a dilemma in that they seem mutually exclusive: it must be one or
the other proposition, but which? Perhaps it is neither, or both: dialisis
disposes of both propositions without paradox (You say Jack loves to
live, that brother Jules / Lives to love? Then I say both are fools: / One
must be alive to love at any cost. / Then live to live, love love, or all is
lost).
Ecphonesis is exclamation or outcry ("Forget that fool, my love," I
scoffed, / "Soon we shall wed! / Soon we shall wed!").
Epithonema is climactic summation at the conclusion of a poem, a
coda (from cauda, a tail), often in a single line or a couplet, as in the
English SONNET.
Epitropis is used when the speaker believes he or she has said enough
and refers the reader to something else to complete the thought (I've
said enough. Time for another beer. / You take these definitions on
from here).
Erotema is the rhetorical question, a question for which no answer is
given or expected because, in context, the answer is obvious, as in the
example illustrating asteismus.
Etiologia is the argumentative technique of assigning a cause or
reason for an action or a circumstance:
Take next,
for thy next mistake
(for muckrake you must

once you've begun to raise dust,
for, to settle the dust,
to everyone be fair
or unfair rather, without care,
that is, care less rather than more
how you effect your cure,
you must sprinkle dews
on the dust, not as you choose,
but as you list,...)*
Ironia, or irony, is witty mockery, usually effected by saying the
opposite of what is actually meant (The lover, intent on camping,

Page 58
went / Into the woods with the best in tent). In this case, the irony
depends upon a pun on the word "intent."
Meiosis is a method of irony or sarcasm that diminishes the
importance of something, "He's a big man indeedbig-headed and big-
bellied."
Metanoia makes a statement, then retracts it by substituting something
else (They tell me that your head is filled with stone. / O, surely not!
But maybe solid bone).
Micterismus is verbal sneering (The old professor knows that books
are safe. / He knows he's really Samson on the make, / Too smart to
lose his eyes).
Noema is an ironic way of speaking by saying one thing on the
surface but meaning something quite different, "You say Fred lives
his life without a taint? / You're right. I wish to God he were a saint."
On the surface, the speaker agrees with the appraisal of Fred, but in
fact he wishes Fred were dead, as only the dead can be saints.
Orismus gives a definition different from someone else's definition of
a word or phrase:
The school's a madhouse? Nay,
a bedroom, maybe, ... *
Paralepsis makes little of something by passing over it lightly or
denying it is of importance, thereby emphasizing its actual importance
through understatement:
and here is All America:
what's there to say of him?
He has a pretty wife.
He keeps his hair in trim.*

Paramalogia is, in George Puttenham's words, "the figure of
admittance." It admits arguments to the contrary so as to undercut the
opponent's case:
Oh, what a mess
is this paper. I guess
poor Bod's hopeless. I am unlettered,
sirs, a man fettered
by ignorance. Ignore,

Page 59
if you will, my bespattered
page, for I've been but smattered
with lore here and there.
Beware
the dull pen, sirsit may tell lies
or, worse, my lords, truth,
if you watch not your way.*
Parimia is to speak by means of proverbs ("An apple a day keeps the
doctor away." / That's truehe'd rather have money as pay).
Parisia is an apology by the writer of scurrilous or, as Puttenham
says, "licentious" material:
Sirs,
I am one of your proslers,
no poet. In prose
anything goes.
Not so in verse,
or so they converse
in the various schools.
I would beg to disagree,
if it were not that fools
such as yours truly
tend toward the unruly,
which is why there are rules.*
Procatalepsis preempts opposing arguments by anticipating the
argument before the opponent can articulate it:
We ought to break
into breakneck
Skeltonics just about now,

Gentlemen, I know, but perhaps
we'll just let the meters break down
a tiny bit.*
Sarcasmus, or sarcasm, is heavy irony or, as Puttenham described it,
"the bitter taunt." There is little wit in sarcasm, as, for instance, when
one bridge partner says to the other who has just played a bad hand,
"Oh, you're just a terrific player, simply marvelous."
Tapinosis is saying too little about a subjectunderstatement. It

Page 60
is not the same, however, as litotes (see the next chapter) or studied
understatement. The heart of poetry is saying just enough. Frequently,
a poet is more effective by merely showing the situationletting it
speak for itselfrather than telling the reader how to think or feel about
a subject.

Page 61
5
The Ideational Level
A poem is an artifice of thought as well as of metrics, sonics, and
tropes, and there is no thought except in symbols, in forms. Every
element of language is a form of some kind. The letters of the
alphabet are formsconventions, the meanings of which we have
agreed upon in order to communicate. Syllables are forms, as are
words, phrases, and sentences. The poet is interested in all of these
forms, since his or her medium is language. On the ideational level,
we deal with the subject of words, specifically in their grammatic and
syntactic forms.
Orthographical Schemas
Orthographical schemas are about single words and syllables.
Prosthesis adds syllables at the beginning of a word without changing
the meaning of that word (i.e., "configuration" for "figuration").
Proparalepsis adds syllables at the end of a word (i.e., "figuration" for
"figure").
Epenthis adds syllables in the center of a word (i.e., "disenfigure" for
"disfigure").
Aphaeresis is an overt elision technique that drops the initial,
unstressed syllable of a word, usually a vowel (i.e., ""til" for "until,"
''tis" for "it is," "let's" for "let us").
Apocope drops syllables from the end of a word ("morn" for
"morning"see apocopated rhyme).

Syncope is an overt elision technique that drops a syllable from the
center of a word (i.e., "suff'ring" for "suffering").
Synalepha is an overt elision technique wherein one of two adjacent,
unaccented vowels is suppressed to achieve the effect of only one
unaccented syllable (i.e., "Th'art of poetic diction").

Page 62
Hyphaeresis is an overt elision technique that drops a consonant from
the center of a word in order to telescope two syllables and make them
one, as in "whene'er" for "whenever." Note that aphaeresis, apocope,
hyphaeresis, synalepha, and syncope are methods of contraction. For
more information on this subject, see elision in chapter 3.
Amphisbaenia turns a word backward to make another word, as in
"He mined ore in denim cloth" (see amphisbaenic rhyme).
Anagram is a word, phrase, or sentence constructed by rearranging
(transposing) the letters of another word, phrase, or sentence: "live" =
"vile," "stunted" = "student." Metathesis transposes the letters of a
word; it is the process of forming an anagram. (See the section on the
ANAGRAM in Part II.)
Antisthecon changes the sound of a word; for instance, "stoont" for
"student."
Diaeresis concerns the pronunciation of two contiguous vowels in
different ways (i.e., "Cooperation," "neologism").
Dialect changes the spelling of a word, but not its sound, "vittles" for
"victuals," "parlour" for "parlor," or "Chumley" for "Cholmondelay"
(see dialect rhyme).
Homographs (homomorphs) are words spelled alike but with totally
different meanings, such as the verb bore, "to drill," and the noun
bore, "a dull person." Homographic rhyme is a form of rime riche.
Homonyms are words that sound alike but that are spelled differently
and have different meanings (bear - bare, time - thyme). Homonymic
rhyme is a form of rime riche. While we are speaking of "rhyme," it
might be well to note that the correct spelling of the word is, in fact,
"rime" or the Middle English "ryme." Because of confusion over the

centuries with the word rhythm, from the Greek rhythmos and Latin
rhythmus, the orthographic form has, in common English usage, been
corrupted.
A palindrome is a word, phrase, clause, or larger unit that reads the
same backwards as forward: "radar" = "radar"; "Able was I ere I saw
Elba" = "Able was I ere I saw Elba."
Tmesis is the breaking up of a compound word, usually by inserting a
related word (i.e., "when you ever go" instead of "whenever you go").
This technique was used by the twentieth-century poet e. e.
cummings.

Page 63
Constructional Schemas
Constructional schemas have to do with the ways in which words,
phrases, clauses, and larger units are grammatically balanced.
Grammatical parallelism was discussed when I talked about prose
prosodies. Synonymia is paraphrase in parallel structures (I love you;
you are my beloved); synthesis is consequence in parallel structures (1
love you; therefore, I am yours); antithesis is the opposition of ideas
expressed in parallel structures (I love you, and I loathe you); auxesis
is the building up, in parallel structures, of a catalog or series that
ultimately closes at the zenith (high point) of the set (the climax: I
love your eyes, hair, breasts; I love the way you walk and speak; I
love you); meiosis is the building down, in parallel structures, of a
catalog or series that ultimately closes at the nadir (low point) of the
set (the anticlimax: We struggled through dense forests; we forded
raging torrents; we battled the terrors of storm and starvation to reach
the road; we took the bus home). Kenneth Fearing's "Dirge" in Poetry
(op. cit.) is an example.
Chiasmus is cross-parallelism in parallel structures:
I vied with the wind, she fought the air,
and as she lost, I was victorious.
Syneciosis cross-couples antonyms, words antithetical in meaning or
opposite in such a way as to make them agree: "We are ourselves
victim and victor. / You were and are ourselves." The italicized words
are the antonyms. See "November 22, 1963" in Poetry (op. cit.) for an
example of syneciosis.
Isocolon is a term that designates perfect parallelism (see isoverbal
prosody in chapter 3). Brachiologa is the technique of separating
words by pauses, usually indicated by means of punctuation (commas

Page 64
Parison is construction using parallel clauses of equal weight, as in
Chidiock Tichborne's "Elegy," written during the English Renaissance
on the evening of his execution:
Elegy: On The Evening of His Execution
My prime of youth is but a frost of cares,
My feast of joy is but a dish of pain,
My crop of corn is but a field of tares,
And all my good is but vain hope of gain;
The day is past, and yet I saw no sun,
And now I live, and now my life is done.
My tale was heard and yet it was not told,
My fruit is fallen, and yet my leaves are green,
My youth is spent and yet I am not old,
I saw the world and yet I was not seen;
My thread is cut and yet it is not spun,
And now I live, and now my life is done.
I sought my death and found it in my womb,
I looked for life and saw it was a shade,
I trod the earth and knew it was my tomb,
And now I die, and now I was but made;
My glass is full, and now my glass is run,
And now I live, and now my life is done.
CHIDIOCK TICHBORNE
This poem illustrates both parallel constructions and the trope of
paradox, for each pair of clauses contains an inherent contradiction
which finally, nevertheless, is true. It also illustrates sinathrismus,
"the heaping figure" in Puttenham's parlance or, as it is now called,
the "catalog," a listing of things in parallel. A well-known poem that
illustrates sinathrismus is Carl Sandburg's "Chicago."
Syntax

Page 65
types of syntax found in poetry. For consistency here, Davie's
terminology will at times be changed.
Davie says that "Poetic syntax is [egopoetic] when its function is to
please us by the fidelity with which [word order] follows the 'form of
thought' in the poet's mind." In other words, the poet chooses a word
order that tells the reader exactly what he is thinking, as in the first
line of the eighteenth-century poet Christopher Smart's poem "The
Coffin, the Cradle, and the Purse": "For the coffin and the cradle and
the purse are all against a man." Egopoetic syntax is subjective word
order, personal opinion:
I'm Nobody
I'm nobody! Who are you?
Are you nobody, too?
Then there's a pair of usdon't tell!
They'd banish us, you know.
How dreary to be somebody!
How public, like a frog
To tell your name the livelong day
To an admiring bog.
EMILY DICKINSON
Davie says, "Poetic syntax is [narrative] when the function is to
please us by the fidelity with which [word order] follows a 'form of
action,' a movement not through any mind, but in the world at large,"
as in this poem based on lines from Emily Dickinson's letters:
The Naked Eye
The chickens grow very fast
I am afraid they will be so large
that you cannot perceive them
with the naked eye when you get home.

Page 66
We had eggs for breakfast or,
rather, an eggthe yellow yolk
ran under the sideboard, and
it stayed there, refusing to come out.
The cat walking down the stair
makes a great noisethe banister
bulges out as she descends.
The trees in the yard block out the sun
we are not sure that the sun
still regards us in our small world
with a great eye fully clothed
in the raiment of its rays and beams.
We stumble in the shadows.
The candles speak so slightly that
we can hardly hear their words,
and the mossthe moss is at the door.
Davie writes, "Poetic syntax is dramatic when its function is to please
us by the fidelity with which it follows the 'form of thought' in some
mind other than the poet's, which the poet imagines." This word order
is the same as egopoetic, except that it tells us not what is in the mind
of the poet, but what is in the mind of an imaginary characterthe
thoughts of a persona:
Dying
I heard a fly buzz when I died;
The stillness round my form
Was like the stillness in the air
Between the heaves of storm.
The eyes beside had wrung them dry,
And breaths were gathering sure
For that last onset, when the king

Page 67
Could make assignableand then
There interposed a fly,
With blue, uncertain, stumbling buzz,
Between the light and me;
And then the windows failed, and then
I could not see to see.
EMILY DICKINSON
At first glance, this poem might seem to be written in egopoetic
syntax. Hyatt H. Waggoner in his book American Poets from the
Puritans to the Present (Boston, 1968), however, pointed out that
Nathaniel Hawthorne was one of Dickinson's favorite authors, and
that this poem is, in fact, written from the viewpoint of the persona of
Judge Pyncheon in The House of the Seven Gables, at the moment of
his death as he sat in front of a window. A moment's thought would
perhaps have led us to realize that the speaker is dead, and that one
cannot speak from beyond the grave under ordinary circumstances.
These three kinds of poetic syntax are traditional, and they are easily
understood, but not so with the fourth sort.
According to Davie, "Poetic syntax is [abstract] when its function is
to please us by the fidelity with which it follows a 'form of thought'
through the poet's mind but without defining that thought."
Bloom upon the Mountain
Bloom upon the Mountainstated
Blameless of a Name
Efflorescence of a Sunset
Reproducedthe same
Seed, had I, my Purple Sowing
Should endow the Day
Not a Tropic of a Twilight
Show itself away

Page 68
Who be Her Renown, or fading,
Witness, is not here
While I statethe Solemn Petals,
Far as Northand East,
Far as South and Westexpanding
Culminatein Rest
And the Mountain to the Evening
Fit His Countenance
Indicating, by no Muscle
The Experience
EMILY DICKINSON
Music is the most abstract of the arts because there are no
conventional meanings attached to notes as there are to words. Some
twentieth-century painters chose to jettison representational figures in
order to approximate music, and the result was "abstract" art.
Similarly, if a poet strips words of their denotations and uses them for
their connotations only, the poet is then writing in abstract syntax (see
much of the work of Wallace Stevens and John Ashbery and the just
quoted poem by Emily Dickinson). In any particular poem, a poet
might, of course, mix two or more kinds of poetic syntax.
Hyperbaton is the term that indicates the various kinds of dislocation
or inversion of grammatic syntax:
Anastrophe is the inversion of normal word order ("Go I shall" for "I
shall go"'). Cacosintheton is anastrophe misused, as in an artificial
"poetic diction" (more about diction later).
Hypallage is an exchange of words in phrases or clauses. The
technique is used in the first line of e. e. cummings' poem "Anyone
Lived in a Pretty How Town." The title is also the first line of the
poem, and it can be read in these ways: "anyone lived in a pretty how

town," "anyone lived in how pretty a town," or "how anyone lived in a
pretty town." The third version is normal syntactic order as part of a
longer sentence, for instance, "How anyone lived in a pretty town is
beyond me."
Parenthesis is the insertion of material that interrupts the thought

Page 69
(I was goingor have I told you this?to go away). A
prosodyparentheticsbased on this schema is discussed in Poetry (op.
cit.). Epitheton (apposition) is an inserted, synonymous modification
of a sentence element, such as a subject (John Jones, my good friend,
is a poet).
Anacoluthon is a shift of grammatical construction in midsentence
that leaves the beginning unfinished (You may remember the
nightlisten! The dog is barking at the door).
Hendiadys is a construction that treats a double subject or object as
though it were singular, not plural, in order to express a thought that is
operating on more than one level (My lust and her adamance is Hell).
Hysteron proteron is the reversal of chronological events for purposes
of intensification or stress ("Let us break our necks and jump" rather
than "Let us jump and break our necks").
Zeugma (to be distinguished from zeugmatic syllepsis) is a yoking or
binding together of two sentence elements by means of another
element, which would otherwise have had to be repeated elsewhere in
the sentence. Three kinds of zeugma have been distinguished:
prozeugma, in which the binding element precedes the parts it binds,
"Everyone wishes to come, and [everyone] will do so, regardless";
mesozeugma, in which the binding element is between the yoked
parts, "This is the place he loved, and the woman [he loved]";
hypozeugma, in which the binding element follows the yoked parts,
"Neither life [need be feared], nor death itself need be feared."
Exclusive and Inclusive Schemas
Exclusive schemas are constructions that leave things out of the
sentence:

Ellipsis leaves out words, thereby speaking in a starker way than is
normal, as in "I love the dark" rather than "I am in love with
darkness." Ellipsis is an essential part of the au.
Asyndeton, the opposite of polysyndeton, eliminates articles, con-

Page 70
junctions, and sometimes prepositions and pronouns from normal
sentences (1 chased [the] wind, [thel wind chased me).
Aposiopesis is the simple deletion of an important letter, syllable,
word, or passage (You can go to ----!).
Syllepsis includes two kinds: Elliptical syllepsis is a grammatical
construction in which one part of speech controls two other elements,
agreeing with only one of them (She kisses me, and I [kiss] her);
zeugmatic syllepsis has a part of speech correctly controlling two
other elements, but controlling them in different ways (He waited with
mind and dagger sharp).
Inclusive schemas add things to the sentence:
Enallage changes the tense, gender, or number of some part of speech.
This construction is rare in English. For an example, see the poem
titled "The Guestroom" in Poetry: An Introduction (op. cit.).
Irmus is suspended sense. Not until the end of a passage does the
reader fully understand what is being spoken of (see Morton Marcus'
poem titled "Look Closely" in his collection Where the Oceans Cover
Us [Santa Barbara, 1972]).
Merismus expands upon a subject by particularizing each element of
it. Bill Sloan's poem "A Portrait of the Day," found in Alberta
Turner's Poets Teaching (op. cit.), is based upon this schema as well
as the next construction, prolepsis.
Prolepsis expands upon a general statement, particularizing it and
giving further information regarding it, as in Tichborne's "Elegy"
quoted previously.
Substitutive and Repetitive Schemas

Substitutive schemas replace sentence elements with others.
Anthimeria substitutes one part of speech for anotherfor example, a
noun for a verb in "The clock's chime belfries over the town," or as in
d. a. levy's "Bop for Kiddies" where the narrator says, "i
watermeloned down the lawn" (see Poetry: An Introduction [op. cit.]
for further discussion of this poem).
Antonomasia substitutes for a noun a phrase describing the noun. The
descriptive phrase is derived from some quality associated with the
noun. For instance, instead of saying "Queen Elizabeth I," a

Page 71
poet might (and often does) say, "The Virgin Queen." A trope that
utilizes antonomasia is the kenning.
Hyperbole is calculated exaggeration (Her eyes were as big as
moons), as in Kenneth Fearing's "Dirge" cited previously.
Implied aposiopesis substitutes another letter, syllable, word, or
passage for the dropped material (You are an as-phyxiating person).
Litotes, the reverse of hyperbole, is studied understatement, as in John
Crowe Ransom's "Bells for John Whiteside's Daughter" where the
poet uses the term "brown study"a faraway look in the eyes, an
unfocused lookas a substitute for the glazed look of death.
Metalepsis substitutes for a word a synonym that is essentially
metaphorical since the equation between the word and its synonym is
not obviousfor instance, "I met Ray just as he first thumbed / the last
of thirteen buttons," instead of "I met Ray on the day he enlisted in the
Navy." Out of context, the line seems farfetched. In a way, it is
farfetched, and, in fact, Puttenham called this structure the farfet, a
neologism. For the poem "Ray," see "The Sketches" in my
Pocoangelini: A Fantography (Northampton, 1971).
Metonymy is a way of describing by using a word related to a word
rather than the original word itself ("The heart will find a way" rather
than "Love will find a way").
Paradiastole substitutes for a word an antonym rather than a
synonym, to ironic effect. For instance, when speaking of a cheap
skate you might say, "Skinflint is generous to a fault," or, of a coward,
"He bravely rose in battle and ran away."
Periphrasis is saying something in a more grandiloquent or
roundabout way than is usual"She was taken unto the bosom of her

forebears" rather than "She died."
Prosonomasia is a way of nicknaming someone by substituting a
letter or letters in his name, thereby describing him by some personal
characteristic. For instance, if a very thin man were named "Jones,"
you might substitute a B for the J and call him "Bones."
Synecdoche describes by substituting a part for the whole, as in "He
was the King's legs" rather than "He was the King's messenger."
Repetitional schemas are reiterative constructions.
Anadiplosis is the linking of two consecutive verses or stanzas by
repeating words (I saw her hair, / Her dark hair windblown).
Anaphora is the parallel repetition of a beginning word or phrase in
succeeding lines of verse:

Page 72
Of the Spiritual Musick
For the spiritual musick is as follows.
For there is the Thunder-Stop, which is the voice of God
direct.
For the rest of the Stops are by their rhimes.
For the Trumpet rhimes are sound bound, soar more and the
like.
For the Shawm rhimes are lawn fawn moon boon and the like.
For the Harp rhimes are sing ring, string & the like.
For the Cymbal rhimes are bell well toll soul & the like.
For the Flute rhimes are tooth youth suit mute & the like.
For the Dulcimer rhimes are grace place beat heat & the like.
For the Clarinet rhimes are clean seen and the like.
For the Bassoon rhimes are pass, class and the like. God be
gracious to Baumgarden.
For the Dulcimer are rather van fan & the like and grace place
&c are of the Bassoon.
For beat heat, weep peep &c are of the Pipe.
For every word has its marrow in the English tongue for order
and for delight.
For the dissyllables such as able, table &c are the Fiddle rhimes.
For all dissyllables and some trissyllables are Fiddle rhimes.
For the relations of words are sometimes in heir istances from
the pair.
CHRISTOPHER SMART
Antanaclasis is the witty repetition of a word in an amplified or
changed sense, that is, the pun:
Eve's Daughter
Eve's daughter can entrance you with her eyes;
Her hisses and her curves can mesmerize.
Fellows, be wary of her. Shun the snake.

Page 73
Antimetabole is the repetition of two beginning words, in reverse
order, later in a verse or sentence (To kiss her is to love her kiss).
Antistrophe repeats a single word throughout a poem, particularly an
end-word, as in the Smart poem just quoted or the French SESTINA.
Echoics were discussed under the sonic level.
Emphasis reinforces a word. It can be done in several waysby
repetition (He was dumb, dumb, dumb!); by using a different typeface
such as italics (He was dumb!); by building a series of synonyms (He
was dumbI mean, he was ignorant, stupid, and otherwise thick), and
so forth.
Epanalepsis is the repetition of a word, for clarity or for emphasis,
after the intervention of a word, phrase, or clause. In verse,
epanalepsis specifically means to end a line, stanza, or poem with the
same word or words with which it began. The Irish bards called this
construction dunadh (dóo-na), and certain forms, such as the RONDEAU
and the roundeL require this kind of repetition.
Epanodis, like prolepsis, expands upon a general statement, but in
addition, it repeats terms contained in the general statement.
Epimone is the term meaning the use of repeated lines at intervals
within a poem, discussed in the chapter on the sonic level under
"refrain."
Epiphora is the repetition of end-words or end-phrases specifically, as
in the sesTInA.
Epizeuxis repeats a word without any pause between (Tramp, tramp,
tramp, the boys are marching).
Hypozeuxis is the repetition of words in parallel constructions. The

repeated words govern the sense of the clause or clauses of which they
are a part (Up to the door I'll go, and at the door I'l rap, / Whether or
not the man I seek is lying in his nap).
Ploce is the repetition of words or phrases at irregular intervals
throughout a stanza, poem, or long passage.
Polyptoton is the repetition of words derived from the same root (He
ran, will run, and is running now).
Polysyndeton is the repetition of conjunctionsthe opposite of
asyndeton (see exclusive schemas)and is to be distinguished from
anaphora.
Symploce is a combination of anaphora or antistrophe and epiphora.

Page 74
Diction and Voice
I have noted that syntax deals with the order of words in a sentence. In
contemporary speech, the following would be an example of normal
word order or syntax: "A thought of grief came to me alone." In this
sentence, the subject comes first, then the predicate: "A thought ...
came ... to me.... " In line four of stanza three from Wordsworth's
"Ode," cited previously, the normal syntax is changed: "To me alone
there came a thought of grief." The two sentences say exactly the
same thing, but they sound different because of the syntax, which has
transformed the level of diction in the line. The tone of the second
version has been "elevated," and it is now an example of poetic
diction, a diction designed specifically for writing what nineteenth-
century poets considered to be an appropriately "elevated" poetry.
Syntax and diction are related. They depend on one another, but they
are not the same thing. Syntax is concerned with the form of the
sentence; diction has to do with its tone and style. The level of diction
of a truck driver is different (usually) from that of an archbishop. An
archbishop speaks in an elevated "style," a truck driver, perhaps, in an
idiomatic style. These styles are dependent on the levels of diction the
individuals choose to speak in.
A truck driver in a play could not say, "To me alone there came a
thought of grief," because the sentence would not be in character; the
level of diction is poetic, not vernacular. To be believable as a
character, the truck driver would have to say something like, "A sad
thought came to me by my lonesome." The level of diction would thus
be in keeping with the character, and the sentence would be an
example of base style rather than mean or high style.
If an older, well-educated woman character was written into the script,
a different version might fit: "A thought of grief came to me alone,"

Page 75
grief high style and poetic diction. Only in this last version, however,
is the word order, the syntax, out of normal order. It is "artificial"
syntax; it does not seem "natural" but is perfectly good English.
Someone speaks in every poem ever written. There are three narrative
voices, which parallel the three major and traditional syntaxes: the
egopoetic, the narrative, and the dramatic voices. There are three
persons and two numbers of voice: first, second, and third person
speakers, and singular and plural numbers. This table will help us see
who is speaking, and what he or she is speaking about:
Voice:
Egopoetic
Narrative
Dramatic
Person:
First
I
Second
Third
I, we
you, you (pl.)
he, she, it, they
I
The egopoetic voice is single-angled. The speaker is taking a stance at
the center of his or her world and telling about it from the first-person
singular viewpoint. The egopoet's method is autobiographical in
nature and exclusive in effect. There is but one angle of vision, and
either the reader agrees with the poet or not. Those who do not agree
are excluded from participation in the subjective, ego-centered
relationship. Egopoets often use rhetorical methods, telling rather than
persuading or showing. Most lyric poetry is written in the egopoetic
voice, but traditionally the interest of the poem is carried by the music
of the poem, by the sonic level which makes it palatable.
The narrative voice is double-angled at least, depending on the
number of characters whose stories are being told in the poem. The
poet relates someone else's or perhaps his own story by standing
outside himself or herself and taking an objective viewpoint. The
reader is not excluded by the narration because he or she is

Page 76
tells the story, there is also an inclusive angle of reflection that tells us
as much about the narrator, perhaps, as about the character in the
poem. More information about narrative viewpoint will be found in
the section on NARRATIVES.
The dramatic voice is similar to the narrative voice, except that here
the poet takes the reader inside another character's person, and both
we and the poet become that person. We therefore see the persona's
world in the same way that we saw the poet's world from the
egopoetic viewpoint. The main difference is that we can still see the
poet-speaker's viewpoint by reflection, as in the narrative voice, from
the way in which the poet makes the persona speak. The dramatic
viewpoint is the most inclusive of the three, for it is both objective and
"subjective" (from the viewpoint of the character). The more personae
the poet imagines in the poem the more inclusive it is.
All three viewpoints and voices can be blended in a work of literature,
and the effect is potentially "universal." For example, both Dante and
Chaucer not only told great stories about other people in the Divine
Comedy and The Canterbury Tales, respectively, but also included
themselves in their stories as characters, and had their various
personae tell their own stories as well. Here is another table, showing
correspondences among the major and minor subgenres of the genre
of poetry, the three traditional syntaxes, and the three voices:
Major subgenres Traditional syntaxes
Voices
Lyrics
(songs)
Narratives
Egopoetic
Narrative
Egopoetic
Narrative
(stories)
Dramatics
Dramatic
Dramatic
(speeches)

Page 77
(table continued from previous page)
Minor subgenres Traditional syntaxes Voices
Bucolics
Dramatic
Dramatic
(pastorals)
Didactics
(lessons)
Forensics
Egopoetic/
narrative
Dramatic
Egopoetic/
narrative
Dramatic
(debates)
Occasionals
Egopoetic
Egopoetic
(memorials)
Satirics
Narrative
Narrative
(mockery/
parody)
There is but one element left to discover: What is the theme of the
poem under consideration? If the subject can be stated in a single
word or phrase, for instance "love," what has the poet said about love?
The theme is stated only in a complete sentence: "Love is a many-
splintered thing" perhaps, or "Love is an abstraction that can be
defined in as many ways as there are individuals on the earth."

Page 81
6
Form-Finder Index
Every element of language is a form of some kind, as I have suggested
at earlier points; but there are certain structures that have traditionally
been associated with the genre of poetry, and these will be the subject
of the rest of this volume. Over three hundred of these forms are listed
here. To identify the form of a poem, the reader should first determine
its meter; second, determine its rhyme scheme; third, count the lines in
one stanza (if looking for a stanza form) or the lines in the whole
poem (if looking for a poem form). When these elements have been
determined, the reader should look under the appropriate heading of
the following Form-Finder: if the form is irregular, look under
General Forms; if the form is regular, look under Specific Forms and
thssen under the appropriate subheading ("One-Line Forms" through
"Two Hundred Ten-Line Forms"). Under these headings are the lists
of forms. Definitions of all these forms are listed alphabetically in the
next chapter. The poem in question can be compared with the
appropriate definitions until the form of that poem or stanza has been
found.
One final note: many poems are "regular," that is, traditionally formal,
but the specific combinations of stanza pattern, line lengths, rhyme
schemes, and meters have been created by the poet. Such poems are
called nonce forms.
Specific Forms
One-Line Forms
adonic (see sAPPHICs)

Alexandrine (see POULTER'S MEASURE)
Anglo-Saxon Prosody
blank verse (see Sonics, p. 27 and HERoIcs)

Page 82
choriambics
classical hexameter (see ELEGIACS)
classical pentameter
cyhydedd naw ban
fourteener (see POULTER'S MEASURE)
grammatic parallels (see Prose prosodies, p. 8)
antithetical parallel synonymous parallel
climactic parallel
synthetic parallel
hendecasyllabics
heroic line (see HEROICS)
hudibrastics (see SATIRICS)
mondo (see KATAUTA)
mote
rhupunt
Sapphic line (see sAPPHICs)
septenary (see POULTER'S MEASURE)
tawddgyrch cadwynog (see RHUPUNT)
Two-Line Forms
barzeletta
carol texte
elegiacs
heroic couplet (see HEROICS)

choka
couplet
Alexandrine couplet
cyhydedd fer
cywydd deuair fyrion
cywydd deuair hirion
Nashers
qasida
short couplet
split couplet
Hudibrastics (see SATIRICs)
Nasher (see PROSE POEMS)
Poulter's measure
primer couplet (see DIDACTICS)
tanka couplet (see TANKA)
Three-Line Forms
blues stanza
haiku
hokku
senryu
katauta
(see FORENSICS)
tercet
triplet
enclosed tercet
enclosed triplet
Sicilian tercet
englyn milwr
terza rima
englyn penfyr
capitolo
Sicilian triplet
triversen stanza

Page 83
Four-Line Forms
ae freislighe
alcaics
awdl gywydd
ballad stanza
ballade envoy
double refrain ballade
envoy
byr a thoddaid
carol stanza
casbairdne
Clerihew
common measure
hymnal stanza
long hymnal stanza
long measure
short hymnal stanza
short measure
deibhidhe
edda measures
old story measure
song measure
speech measure
englyn cyrch (see ENGLYNs)
englyn lleddfbroest
englyn proest dalgron
englyn proest gadwynog
englyn unodl crwca
englyn unodl union
gwawdodyn
heroic stanza (see HEROICS)
kyrielle
pantoum
quatrain
envelope stanza
Italian quatrain
redondilla
Sicilian quatrain
rannaigheacht ghairid
(see RANNAIGHEACHTS)
deachnadh mor
randaigecht
chetharchubaid
rannaigheacht bheag
rannaigheacht mhor
rionnaird tri n-ard
rispetto stanza
rubai
Sapphics
seadna
seadna mor
sneadhbhairdne
toddaid
wheel (see BOB AND WHEEL

Page 84
Six-Line Forms
clogyrnach
cywydd llosgyrnog
gwawdodyn hir
(see GWAWDODYNS)
hir a thoddaid
rime couée
standard habbie
sestet
heroic sestet
Italian sestet
sextilla
Sicilian sestet
short particular measure
somonka
stave
couplet envelope
Seven-Line Forms
rime royal
rondelet
septet
Sicilian septet
Eight-Line Forms
ballade stanza
double ballade stanza
double refrain ballade stanza
huitain
common octave
(see COMMON MEASURE)
hymnal octave
long hymnal octave
long octave
short hymnal octave
short octave
cyrch a chwta
lai nouveau (see LAI)
madrigal
octave
Italian octave
Sicilian octave
strambotto
ottava rima
rispetto
heroic octave
heroic rispetto

cyhydedd hir
Nine-Line Forms
lai
virelai
Ronsardian ode stanza
Ten-Line Forms
ballade supreme stanza
dizain
double ballade supreme
stanza
triolet
Spenserian stanza
triad (see TERCET)
decastich
English ode stanza (see
ODE)
madrigal

Eleven-Line Forms
chant royal stanza
madrigal
Twelve-Line Forms
rondine
Thirteen-Line Forms
madrigal
Fourteen-Line Forms
blues sonnet
(See BLUES STANZA)
bref double
quatorzain
rondel prime (see
RONDEL)
sonetto rispetto
(see RISPETTO)
Fifteen-Line Forms
rondeau
Eighteen-Line Forms
Page 85
roundel
rondel
sonnet
English sonnet
Italian sonnet
Sicilian sonnet
Spenserian sonnet
terza rima sonnet (see TERZA
RIMA)

heroic sonnet (see soNNET)
triversen
Nineteen-Line Forms
terzanelle
villanelle
Twenty-Line Forms
caudated sonnet (see soNNeT)
Twenty-Four-Line Forms
roundelay
Twenty-Five-Line Forms
rondeau redoubled (see RONDEAU)

Page 86
Twenty-Eight-Line Forms
ballade
double refrain ballade
Thirty-Line Forms
English ode (see oDE)
Thirty-Five-Line Forms
ballade supreme (see BALLADE)
Thirty-Nine-Line Forms
sestina
Forty-Eight-Line Forms
double ballade (see BALLADE)
Sixty-Line Forms
chant royal
double ballade supreme (see BALLADE)
Ninety-Eight-Line Forms
crown of sonnets (see soNNET)

Two Hundred-Line Forms
qasida
Iwo Hundred Ten-Line Forms
sonnet redoubled (see soNNET)
General Forms
acrostic
double acrostic
telestich
alba
allegory
anacreontics
anagram
antiphon
aubade
balada (see LYRIcs)
dansa
ballad
beast epic
bestiary

blues (see LYRICS)
bucolics
burlesque
caccia
calligramme
cancione
canso
canticle (see LITURGICS)
canzo
canzone
carol
catalog poem
catch
cento
chanso
chanson de geste
chant
chante-fable
chantey
charms
choral ode
cobla
comedy (see DRAMATICS)
commiato
complaint
coronach
curse (see LITURGICS)
debat
debate
descort
Page 87
dit
dithyramb
ditty
double acrostic
double forms
dramatics
dialogue
eclogue
monologue
soliloquy
dream allegory
dream vision
droighneach
echo verse
eclogue
eclogue debat
elegy
envoi
epic
epicedium
epigram
epistle
epitaph
epithalamion, epithalamium
epyllion
evensong
exemplum (see NARRATIVES)
fable, fabliau
flyting
forensics

Page 88
grammatics
lyrics, cont.
catalog
canso, canzo, canzone
parenthetics
carol
polyphonic prose
chantey
prose poem
complaint
heroics
hokku
dithyramb
ditty
homostrophic ode
elegy (coronach, dirge,
(see ODE)
monody, threnody)
Horatian ode (see
encomium
ODE)
epithalamion, epithalamium
idyl
hymn
incantation
lament
interlude
lay
irregular ode (see
madrigal
ODE)
madsong
katauta
nonsense verse
lament
nursery rhyme
lay
paean
litany
panegyric
liturgics
pastoral (idyl)
antiphon
pastoral elegy
blessing
canticle
prothalamion, prothalamium
reveille
carol
romance
chant
roundelay
curse
rune
dirge (see LYRIcs)
serenade
evensong
sirvente
hymn (see LYRIcs) madrigal

incantation
litany
morningsong
nightsong
obsequy
prayer
sermon
lyrics
alba (aubade)
anacreontics
balada
blues
caccia, catch
madsong
mask, masque
metrical romance
miracle play
mondo
monody
monologue
morality play
morningsong
mote
mystery play

Page 89
narratives
ballad
pastourelle
pattern verse
beast epic
picture poem
chanson de geste
Pindaric ode (see oDE)
epic
plampede
epyllion
exemplum
posies
pregunta
fabliau
prose poem
nightsong
prothalamion,
noh play (see DRAMATICS)
prothalamium
nonsense verse
reveille
nursery rhyme
riddle
obsequy
rimas dissolutas
occasionals
romance
elegy
rune
epithalamion,
satirics
epithalamium
epigram
genethliacum
epitaph
obsequy
sirvente (see LYRIcs)
ode
Skeltonics
palinode
serenade
prothalamion,
sermon
prothalamium
sirima
triumphal ode
sirvente
ode
Skeltonics
homostrophic ode
song (see LYRIcs)
irregular (Cowleyan) ode spatials
Pindaric ode
calligramme
palinode
concrete poem
panegyric
telestich

Page 90
7
The Forms of Poetry
Acrostic
Can be in any verse prosody or in any form, but is usually metered
and rhymed. The first letters of all the lines, when read downward,
spell out a word or a phrase, usually a name. The poem "To My
Cousin, Mistress Ellinor Evins" provides an example. Note that the
two words in the name form separate stanzas:
lines
verse
10.
11.
12.
E re I forget the zenith of your love,
Let me be banished from the Thrones above;
Light let me never see, when I grow rude,
I ntomb your love in base ingratitude:
Nor may I prosper, but the state
Of gaping Tantalus be my fate;
R ather than I should thus preposterous grow,
E arth would condemn me to her vaults below.
Virtuous and noble, could my genius raise
I mmortal anthems to your vestal praise,
None should be more laborious than I,
S aint-like to canonize you to the sky.
GEORGE ALSOP

The DOUBLe AcrosTic form repeats this feat with the last letters of the lines
as well, the Telestich, only with the last letters of the lines. The CoMPOUND
AcRosTIc Spells out words down the left-hand margin, with something
different down the right-hand one.
For a very complicated acrostic, see Edward Taylor's "Acrostic Love
Poem to Elizabeth Fitch" in Poetry: An Introduction (op. cit.).

Page 91
Ae Freislighe (ay Frésh-lee)
Irish. Syllabic. Since this form is the first Celtic one to be encountered
in this chapter, a note is in order. Almost all the Irish and Welsh forms
are complex systems of rhyme, alliteration, and consonance (see
cynghanedd in the chapter on the sonic level under "echoics"). For the
practical purpose of versification in English, it should be understood
that the systems are most difficult to reproduce accurately in our
language. It would therefore be as well for the poet attempting these
forms to pay attention only to the rhyme scheme and syllabification.
Thus, ae freislighe, simplified, is a QUATRAIN STaNzA of seven syllable
lines. Lines one (1) and three (3) rhyme in triple rhymes; lines two (2)
and four (4) rhyme in double rhymes.
The poem (not the stanza) should end with the same first syllable,
word, or line with which it begins. The technical term for this ending
is dunadh, and it occurs in all the Gaelic forms.
The diagram thus looks like this:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. XXXX (xXa)
2. XXXXX (xb)
3. xxxx (хха)
4. XXXXX (xb)
Love Curse
What's love but a bobolink
Beating its voice on the air,

A morningsong robawink,
Wrack of sleep beyond repair?
What's love but a nematode,
The worm that gnaws its wee hole,
A minuscule episode
Restless to become the whole?

Page 92
Love, love, let me mock you thrice
With catspaw, rue, and foxglove.
Basilisk and cockatrice
Know how to answer, "What's love?"
WESLI COURT
Alba
see AUBADE.
Alcaics
Greek. Quantitative accentual-syllabics. Unrhymed. A QuatraIn stanza.
The first two lines consist of an acephalous iamb, two trochees, and
two dactyls, in that order; the third line consists of an acephalous iamb
and four trochees, in that order; the fourth line is made of two dactyls
followed by two trochees:
lines
2.
3-
4.
meters
* xxxx xxxxxx
xxxxx xxxxxx
xxx xx xxxx
xxxxxx xxxx
The first half of the following poem is written in alcaics, the second
half in HENDECASYLLABICS.
Milton: (Alcaics)
O mighty-mouth'd inventor of harmonies,
O skill'd to sing of Time or Eternity,
God-gifted organ-voice of England,
Milton, a name to resound for ages;
Whose Titan angels, Gabriel, Abdiel,
Starr'd from Jehovah's gorgeous armories,
Tower, as the deep-domed empyrean
Rings to the roar of an angel onset

Page 93
And bloom profuse and cedar arches
Charm, as a wanderer out in ocean,
Where some refulgent sunset of India
Streams o'er a rich ambrosial ocean isle,
And crimson-hued the stately palm-woods
Whisper in odorous heights of even.
[Catullus]: (Hendecasyllabics)
O you chorus of indolent reviewers,
Irresponsible, indolent reviewers,
Look, I come to the test, a tiny poem
All composed in a metre of Catullus,
All in quantity, careful of my motion,
Like the skater on ice that hardly bears him,
Lest I fall unawares before the people,
Waking laughter in indolent reviewers.
Should I flounder awhile without a tumble
Thro' this metrification of Catullus,
They should speak to me not without a welcome,
All that chorus of indolent reviewers.
Hard, hard, hard is it, only not to tumble,
So fantastical is the dainty metre.
Wherefore slight me not wholly, nor believe me
Too presumptuous, indolent reviewers.
O blatant Magazines, regard me rather
Since I blush to belaud myself a moment
As some rare little rose, a piece of inmost
Horticultural art, or half coquette-like
Maiden, not to be greeted unbenignly.
ALFRED TENNYSON
Alexandrine
The alexandrine is a line of iambic hexameter verse:

Page 94
Alexadrine Couplet
see COUPLET.
Allegory
see DIDACTICS, FABLE, FABLIAU, NARRATIVES; also see the
chapter on the sensory level.
Anacreontics
see LYRICS.
Anagram
Sometimes associated with the acrostic or serving as the epigraph of
other kinds of poems. The anagram is a word or phrase made by
transposing the letters of a name, for example, Gerald Ford = forged
lard. Popular in the seventeenth century and earlier, casting anagrams
was a form of divining; that is, it was a means of foretelling the future
of a person or of extracting the essence of his or her life or
personality:
MARY
ANA-
GRAM
ARMY
How well her name an Army doth present,
In whom the Lord of Hosts did pitch his tent!
GEORGE HERBERT
Anglo-Saxon Prosody
Accentual. A line utilizing alliteration and stress. For a complete
discussion of this form, see accentual prosody under "metrical
prosodies" in chapter 3. See also sprung rhythm. For a form
sometimes associated with Anglo-Saxon prosody, see the BOB AND WHEEL.
For a related prosody, see podics (chapter 3); and for a related form,

see EDDA MEAsURes. For examples, see "The Mystery" in the section on
LITURGICS, "The Magi Carol" in the BOB AND WHEEL, "Three Riddles from the
Anglo-Saxon" in DIdactics, and "The Morbid Man Singing" on pp.
1819.
Antiphon
see LITURGICS.
Aubade
see LYRICS.

Page 95
Awdl Gywydd (owdl gów-widd)
Welsh. Syllabic. A quatrain stanza of seven syllable lines. Lines two (2)
and four (4) rhyme; lines one (1) and three (3) cross-rhyme into the
third, fourth, or fifth syllable of lines two (2) and four (4). Here is a
possible scheme for two stanzas of awdl gywydd:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1.xxxxxxа
2. xxxxxb
3.XXXXXXС
4. xXXXCXb
5.xXXXXXd
6. xxxxxe
7. xxXXXXf
8. xxXfxxe
Here is a modern version of a medieval poem cast into awdl gywydd:
Spring Song
Earthspring, the sweetest season,
Loud the birdsong, sprouts ripple,
Plough in furrow, ox in yoke,
Sea like smoke, fields in stipple.
Yet when cuckoos call from trees
I drink the lees of sorrow;
Tongue bitter, I sleep with pain

No kin remain this morrow.
On mountain, mead, seaborne land,
Wherever man wends his way,
What path he take boots not,
Ie shall not keep from Christ's eve
ANONYMOUS
Balada
see LYRICS.
Ballad
Universal in the Western world. Folk ballads are written in podic
prosody, literary ballads in accentual-syllabics. The BALLAD STANZA iS
a4b3c4b3; however, the ballad can be written

Page 96
in any meter and in many forms. It is usually rhymed, and internal
rhyme is sometimes used. There is no fixed stanza or line-length, and
it often has a refrain or burden. Meant to be sung, the ballad can be
defined as a lyric verse narrative, for all ballads tell stories.
The folk ballad is traditional and anonymously written; the literary
ballad is a composition by a known author. The former often
manifests a phenomenon called "leaping and lingering," meaning that
it skips from high point to high point, ignoring details of the narrative.
The literary ballad, however, develops the whole narrative, including
details and climaxes. For more information concerning the prosody of
the folk ballad, see podic prosody. Here is a possible scheme for two
stanzas of ballad with a refrain:
lines
meters
1.
xxxxx**.
meters
2.
xxxxxb
3.
5.
。
xxxxxxd
xxxxxb
*******.
**×****.
4.
xxxxxxB
8.
xxxx×в
The following are two balladsthe first a folk ballad, the second a
literary ballad:
The Unquiet Grave
"The wind doth blow today, my love,
And a few small drops of rain;
I never had but one true-love,
In a cold grave she was lain.
"T'll do as much for my true-love
As any young man may;
I'll sit and mourn all at her grave
For a twelvemonth and a day."
The twelvemonth and a day being up,
The dead began to speak:

Page 97
"Oh, who sits weeping on my grave
And will not let me sleep?"
"It is I, my love, sits on your grave,
And will not let you sleep;
For I crave one kiss of your clay-cold lips,
And that is all I seek."
"You crave one kiss of my clay-cold lips?
But my breath smells earthy strong!
If you have one kiss of my clay-cold lips,
Your time will not be long.
''Tis down in yonder garden green,
Love, where we used to walk
The finest flower that ere was seen
Is withered to a stalk.
"The stalk is withered dry, my love,
So will our hearts decay;
So make yourself content, my love,
Till God calls you away."
ANONYMOUS
The Little Boy Lost
"Father, father, where are you going?
O do not walk so fast!
Speak, father, speak to your little boy,
Or else I shall be lost."
The night was dark, no father was there,
The child was wet with dew;
The mire was deep, and the child did weep,
And away the vapour flew.
WILLIAM BLAKE
For related forms, see coMMoN MEAsUrE. For other narrative forms, see the

Page 98
Ballade
A French form. Syllabic. Lines can be of any single length, but are
usually of eight or ten syllables; in English, often iambic tetrameter or
pentameter. The twenty-eight lines are divided into three ocTave Stanzas
and one quAtraIn half-stanza called the envoi or envoy. The ballade
turns on three rhymes and is built on a refrain, which appears as the
last line of each stanza and of the envoy.
Here is the scheme for the first stanza:
line rhymes
1. a
2. b
3. a
4. b
5. b
6. c
7. b
8. Crefrain
The second stanza (lines nine through sixteen) and the third stanza
(lines seventeen through twenty-four) are exactly the samethe rhyme
sounds do not change, though the words can vary except in the refrain
• Here is the scheme for the envoy:
25. b

26. c
27. b
28. Crefrain
The BALLADE SUPREME has thirty-five lines: three ten-line stanzas rhyming
ababbedcD, with an envoy of five lines rhyming ccdcD. The refrain
appears as the last line of each stanza and of the envoy. Note that this
form has four rhymes.
The DOUBLE BaLLAde and the DOUBLE BALLADE SuPReME have six stanzas of eight
and ten lines, respectively, and fol-

Page 99
low the rhyme schemes of the ballade and the ballade supreme . An
envoy is optional; if one is used, it is the same as in the ballade and
ballade supreme. The refrain usually appears as the last line of each
stanza and of the envoy; however, Chaucer's balladewhich has been
modernizedhas a variant envoy:
Complaint to His Purse
To you, my purseto no one else in sight
I make complaint, for you're my lady dear!
I am so sorry now that you are light
For, certainly, you make such heavy cheer
I'd just as soon be laid upon my bier.
I throw myself upon your mercy, cry,
"Be heavy again, otherwise I may die!"
Grant me this daylest it be turned to night
Your blissful jingle ringing on the ear,
Or let me see your sunshine color bright:
Its yellowness has never owned a peer.
You are my life, heart's helmsman at the steer,
Queen of comfort and of good company.
Be heavy again, otherwise I may die!
Now, purse, that are to me my lifetime's light
And saviour (that is, down in this world here,
Help me get out of town with all your might,
Since you refuse to be my treasurer
(For I am shaved as close as any friar).
Yet, again, I pray unto your courtesy,
Be heavy again, otherwise I may die!
l'envoi [to the king]:
Oh, conqueror of British Albion,
Who by lineage and election
Be truly king, this song to you I send,

Page 100
Contemporary ballades by Ron Block, Dudley Randall, and Judith
Johnson Sherwin can be found in Strong Measures (op. cit.).
The DOUBLE REFRAIN ballade has three, eight-line stanzas rhyming
abaBbcbC, with an envoy of four lines rhyming bBcC. It also has two
refrains. The first refrain appears as lines four, twelve, twenty, and
twenty-six; the second refrain appears as lines eight, sixteen, twenty-
four, and twenty-eight:
Will Somers
(from Bordello)
The sun shone all day
like a bright cock preening
for its hen. Making hay
lay over the greening
grass. There is no meaning
hidden for you to trace
in these wishes leaning
like moonlight on my face,
for I live as I may
I, Will Somersgleaning
in all weathers. I say,
"Lay over the greening
world well, the wind keening
or sighing." Woman's grace
is but a night's dreaming,
like moonlight on my face:
a thing met with on the way,
taken without scheming.
I never married. Clay

lay over the greening
sap of my youth. Steaming
nights I spent alone; lace
fancies all went streaming
like moonlight on my face,
like sweat. Sweat, careening,

Page 101
lay over the greening
fields. Now, I know love's place,
like moonlight on my face.
L. T.
The cHant royaL, a member of the ballade family, is listed separately.
The HuTAIN is a complete poem composed of one ballade stanza
(ababbcbc). Huitains used as stanzas are sometimes called MONK'S TALE
STANZA. The DIza is a complete poem composed of one ballade supreme
stanza (ababbcdcd). The lines for both the huitain and the dizain are
either eight or ten syllables in length or iambic tetrameter or
pentameter in accentual-syllabic prosody.
Note that the addition of an ALExANDRInE line to the iambic pentameter
huitain to form a final couplet (ababbcbcc6) will result in one SPENSERIAN
STANZA.
Ballade Supreme
see BALLADE.
Ballad Stanza
see BALLAD.
Barzeletta
Italian. Written in coupLers having seven syllables in each line, or in
BLANK VERSE pentameters, heptameters, or hendecasyllabics. It uses
internal rhyme and profuse aphorisms, witticisms, and didacticisms.
Beast Epic, Bestiary
Animal fables in verse or prose used as allegories of human nature.
Blank Verse

see HEROICS.
Blues Sonnet
see BLUES STANZA.
Blues Stanza
American. A triplet Stanza derived from the Black jazz tradition of
lamentation or complaint, rhyming AAa. Usually

Page 102
written in loose iambic pentameter measures, the second line an
incremental repeton of the first line, the third line a SYNTHETICPARALLEL
giving a consequence of the first two lines. Here is a schematic
diagram of two blues stanzas:
limes
meters and rhymes
lines
meters and rhymes
1.
4.
xxxx xxxx xB
2.
xxxxxxxx xB
3-
xx xx xx xx xá
6.
xxxxs
Here is a BlEssonNeT, consisting of four triplets of blues stanza plus a
HEROIC COUPLET:
Envoi in a Boneyard
Just let me drop this note into the dark,
Yes, let me drop this note into the dark
I'll light it with a match and watch it spark,
I'll sail it into night with fire and flare,
Fly it into darkness, see it flare
And wink out in those shadows circling there.
I'll watch it take its place among the stars,
Among the minor planets and the stars.
I'll hum the blues, not mucha couple bars
Until the spark has died to inky ash,
And words have flickered into smoken ash.
Then I'll have me a sip of sour mash,
And lean against this marker made of stone
That will not last as long as ink or bone.
WESLI COURT
Bob and Wheel
The bob and wheel is an English accentual-syllabic QUINTET STANZA

Page 103
The final line of the accentual stanza proper is usually an enjambed
line that is continued by the os: a line of verse composed of one or
two verse feetsometimes of only one headless iamb. The bob itself can
be an enjambed line that is continued and completed by the wHeeL: four
lines, each of which consists of three verse feet.
The bob rhymes with lines two (2) and four (4) of the wheel; lines one
(1) and three (3) of the wheel rhyme with each other. The following is
the structure of the entire bob and wheel:
lines
1.
2.
3.
4.
meters and rhymes
...xx xxxa-hob
xx xx xb
xx xx xá
xx xik x
xx xx xá
-wheel
Gawain and the Green Knight is too long to quote here, of course, but
a good modern version is found in John Gardner's The Complete
Works of the Gawain Poet (Chicago, 1965). In the poem below,
quatrains of Anglo-Saxon prosody precede the bobs and wheels,
which in this specific case are burdensbobs and wheels are not usually
refrains.
The Magi Carol
Sheep of the fold, fowls of the storm,
In chill the child, chaste in his manger
The kings are coming to crown a King
And here are we, waiting to welcome
them together:
We wish you joy again
Gale, oak & heather,
Mistletoe & pine
In any winter weather.

Page 104
Bearing gold, gifts of myrrh,
Of frankincenseseed of thyme,
Vervain and thorn, horn at the gate
The Magi move among the snows
together:
We wish you joy again
Gale, oak & heather,
Mistletoe & pine
In any winter weather.
Reap the heart of the hoar oak
With a scythe of ore, open the gate
Of the golden bough, bend to dream
Before the stable, the stall of fortune
all together:
We wish you joy again
Gale, oak & heather,
Mistletoe & pine
In any winter weather.
WESLI COURT
Bref Double
French. Syllabic. Lines can be of any single length. Fourteen lines
arranged in three QuAtrAIn stanzas and a concluding CoUPLET. There are
only three rhymes in the poem, but not every line is rhymed. The a
rhyme appears twice somewhere within the three quatrains and once
in the couplet. The b rhyme does likewise. The c rhyme ends each
quatrain.
A possible scheme:
lines rhymes
1. a

2. xno rhyme
3. b
4. C
5. xno rhyme
6. b
7. xno rhyme
8. c
9. xno rhyme
10. a
11. xno rhyme
12. c
13. a
14. b

Page 105
This form is thought to be an ancestor of the sonnet. Actually, the bref
double is a quAtorzaIN: any stanza or poem of fourteen lines other than a
sonnet. Other quatorzains with set forms are the BLUES SONNET, the SICILIAN
SONNET, the SONETTO RISPETTo, and the TERZA RIMA SONNET.
The example given here is also an example of ECHO VERSE:
Bref Double à L'Écho
Echo, speakI expect no answers, though.
I address rock out of a cagefrom this
Stalk of flesh, begotten of earth and sun.
What may one do who has no wish to blaze?
Though
This
Son
Blaze
Through burning blood there move pure
Being's winds,
Mindless, augmenting Chance's forging blow.
These simple facts: Do they apply to all?
Winds
Blow
All
In the balance, is there nothing else that
weights?
Ways
High and low are bafflednot queen or nun
Knows why the womb leads to this maze.
None
The May
May
Count
Beeit buzzes into heat, swarms to count
Blossom and bloom for what, beyond mere
daze?
I ask you clear: Why are we? Do you know?
Why all our multitudes? What shall be won?
Days
No
One
WESLI COURT
Bucolics
A minor subgenre of the genre of poetry, the general form of bucolics
is internal rather than external; that is, bucolics are intended to
contrast simple modes with complex modes of life. The subject matter
of bucolics specifically concerns the exaltation of the natural over the

cultivated man and of the country and rural life over the life of the
town and city. Bucolics are essentially romantic in content and
viewpoint; however, they have had a place in the literature of the
Western world from classic times to the present.

Page 106
Although there is no set external form for the subgenre, several forms
have been associated with it. A number of English-language bucolics
have been written in HEROIC SESTET (ababcc5) and iambic tetrameter
SEXTILLAS (aabccb or ababcc).
The PASTORAL Or IDYL deals on the surface, with country ways, especially
with the doings of shepherds or other rural people, but its allegorical
level is concerned with more generally applicable topics. The ECLOGUE iS
a pastoral cast in the form of a dialogue or monologue spoken by
country folk, and the PASTORAL ELEGY combines elegy and bucolics, as the
name of the form indicates: Readily available examples are
"Thanatopsis" by William Cullen Bryant and "Elegy Written in a
Country Churchyard" by Thomas Gray.
The pAsToraL oDE, like the pastoral elegy, is a combination of the two
forms, except that the ode is more specifically commemorative and
the poem can be set in one of the ODE forms.
The French pastourelle is a narrative poem, intended to be humorous, in
which a knight (who narrates the story) takes advantage of a country
wench, or in which the girl outwits the knight.
Burlesque
see SATIRICS.
Burns Stanza
see STANDARD HABBIE.
Byr a Thoddaid (bir a thó-ddeyed)
Welsh. Syllabic. This quatraIn stanza combines a coupLer consisting of
eight syllables per line with another couplet consisting of ten syllables
in the first line and six syllables in the second line. In the ten-syllable

line, the main rhyme is found before the end of the line, and the
syllables that follow the main rhyme in the ten-syllable line must be
linked by means of alliteration, assonance, or secondary rhyme with
the early syllables of the first part of the six-syllable line. In this
quatrain, either couplet can follow the other. Note that in

Page 107
this scheme, primary or main rhymes are in capital letters; alliteration,
assonances, or secondary rhymes are indicated by means of small
letters:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. xxxxxxXA
2.XXXXXXXA
3. xxxxxxxBx
4. XCXXXB
5. xXXXXXDxe
6. exxxxD
7. XXXXXXXF
8. XXXXXXXF
The following poem ends in a couplet of CYHYDEDD FER:
Huntsong for a Small Son
Dinogad's coat is specked with spots
I made it out of pelts of stoats.
Flingabout, fling! Flingabout, flingabout!
Eight times the song we'll sing.
When your daddy went to the hunt,
Shouldered his spear, his staff in hand,
He called to the hounds that were hale and fleet,
"Fido, fetch! Bowser, trail!"

He caught fish in his little boat
Like a dragon after a stoat.
When your daddy climbed up the craggy rock
He brought back boar, buck, stag,
A stippled gamehen from the hills
And a trout from Oak Fountain Falls.
At whatever your daddy cocks his spear,
There he strikes bear, lynx, fox.
This is no boast, this is no lie
If it escapes then it can fly.
ANONYMOUS
Caccia
see LYRICS.
Calligramme
see SPATIALS.

Page 108
Cancione
A Spanish term applied to any stanzaic poem written in heptasyllabic
or hendecasyllabic lines whose stanza patterns are Nonce Forms invented
by the poet. See canso and cANzo within LYRICS and CANZONE.
Canso
see LYRICS.
Canticle
see LITURGICS.
Canzo
see LYRICS.
Canzone
An Italian form structured, like the pIndaric ode, in three movements.
Each movement, however, is divided into three stanzas. The first two
stanzas (piedi) in each movement are structurally alike; the third
stanza in each movement (the sirima or cauda) is structurally different
from the piedi, but the structures of both piedi and sirima are nonce
forms. The poem often closes with a commiato or valediction. The
meters are usually heptasyllabic or hendecasyllabic.
Capitolo
A satiric TERZA RIMA.
Carol
French and English. Generally speaking, a carol is simply a "joyous
hymn." It originally had a more-or-less set form that consisted of a
two-line burden or TEXTE CoUPLET, rhyming A1 A2, and any number of
QUATRAIN Stanzas, rhyming bbba. The last lines of these stanzas rhymed

Page 109
A possible scheme:
meters, rhymes,
lines
refrains
1.
2.
XXXXXX XA•
XXXX XXXA=
texte
xxxxxx xb
xxxxxx xb
5.
xxxxxxxx b
6. xxxxxxxá or A' or A*
meters, rhymes,
lines
refrains
7.
xxxx xxC
8.
xxxxxx xc
9. Xxxxxx xc
10. xxxxxxxá or A' or A*
II.
xx xxxxxA"
12. xXxxxxxA*
For other forms that use a texte, see the GLosE, the RONDEAU REDOUBLED and
the SONNET REDOUBLED.
The Shepherds' Carol
Terly terlow, terly terlow,
Merry the shepherds began to blow!
About the field they piped full right,
Even about the midst of the night,
And down from heaven there came a light,
Terly terlow, terly terlow!
Of angels there came a company
With merry songs and melody;
The shepherds anon did them espy
Merry the shepherds began to blow!
"Gloria in excelsis!" the angels sung
And said that peace was present among
All men that to the faith had clung,
Terly terlow, terly terlow!
The shepherds hied them to Bethlehem
To see that blessed sun abeam,
And there they found that glorious stream
Merry the shepherds began to blow!

Page 110
Now pray we to that meekest child
And to his mother that is so mild
Who shall be forever undefiled,
Terly terlow, terly terlow!
Terly terlow, terly terlow,
Merry the shepherds began to blow!
ANONYMOUS
In the following poem, Wyatt used the carol stanza not to gloss a texte
but to gloss the first phrase of the first line, which became the refrain:
What Meaneth This?
What meaneth this? When I lie alone
I toss, I turn, I sigh, I groan:
My bed meseems as hard as stone.
What meaneth this?
I sigh, I plain continually:
The clothes that on my bed do lie,
Always methink they lie awry.
What meaneth this?
In slumbers oft for fear I quake;
For heat and cold I burn and shake;
For lack of sleep my head doth ache.
What meaneth this?
And if perchance by me there pass
She unto whom I sue for grace,
The cold blood forsaketh my face.
What meaneth this?
But if I sit to her nearby,
With a loud voice my heart doth cry,
And yet my mouth is dumb and dry.
What meaneth this?

Page 111
Thus have I passed many a year
And many a day, though naught appear
But most of that which most I fear.
What meaneth this?
THOMAS WYATT
For other forms that gloss the poem's initial phrase, see the RonDeAu and
the RouNDEL. For another example of the carol, see "The Magi Carol" in
the section on the Bob AnD wHEEL and "The Wind Carol" in Strong
Measures (op. cit.).
Casbairdne (coss-búyer-dne)
Irish. Syllabic. A quatraIn stanza of heptasyllabic lines with trisyllabic
endings. Lines two (2) and four (4) rhyme, and lines one (1) and three
(3) consonate with them. There are at least two cross-rhymes in each
couplet. In the first couplet, these cross-rhymes need not be exact.
There is alliteration as in RANNAIGHEACHT MHoR, the final syllable of line
four (4) alliterating with the preceding stressed word.
The poem (not the stanza) ends with the same first syllable, word, or
line with which it begins. A simplified scheme:
limes
syllables and rhymes
1.
xxx (xxac)
-consonate
2.
xxxx (xx bc)
3.
xxxh(xx de)
-consonate
4.
xxx (xx bc)
The poem that follows is modified casbairdnethe trisyllabic line
endings have not been adhered to:
The Ruin
Well wrought, this wall that Weird felled.
The fort failed, smoke cast its pall,
Snapped tall rooves: towers fallen

Page 112
Rime scoiled gatekeeps; the mortar
Shattered, slate showershields moulder.
Age ate them, wright and wielder;
Earthgrip clasps builder, elder
And son, in gravegrasp lichen.
Kings fell often under stone
And storm, first slain by weapon:
Arch crashed, stricken, on bare bone.
To soilcrust sank works of skill:
A mood-quick skull bound the wall
All in ironwhat wit and will!
Cunning wonders, well-fixed, fall.
Among these hearths ran hot springs;
In horngabled wings rang throngs;
Men filled meadhalls, long buildings.
Weird made silence of strong song.
There came days of death and pest;
The folk were lost, their flower snatched.
Where they fought, vetch carpets waste,
Ruins where they faced the Fetch.
Henchmen who would build are cinched
In loamclench under this arch
Breeched and broken, wried and wrenched
Groundward from the roof-ridge reach.
There once many a mood-glad wight,
Garnished gold-bright, in wine-pride,
Gazed wide on gems, silver wrought
And fought for from tide to tide;
On wealth held, bared in a hoard
Where hoar now holds the brave, broad
Burg, here where the goodman stood

Page 113
Catalog Poem
The catalog is a listing of parts of speech in parallel structures.
Christopher Smart's "Of the Spiritual Musick," previously quoted, is
an example. See also PROSE POEM.
Catch
see CACCIA, LYRICS, ROUNDELAY.
Cento
A pastiche poem compiled from the works or notebooks of a dead
poet. Here is a cento in quantitative syllabic verse from the letters of
Emily Dickinson:
Poetry
Memory's fog is rising: I had a terror
I could tell to noneand so l sing,
as the boy does in the burying ground,
because I am afraid. When a sudden light
on the orchards, or a new fashion in the wind
troubled my attention, I felt a palsy,
here, the verses just relieve.
I am
small, like the wren, and my hair is bold,
like the chestnut burr, and my eyes like sherry
in the glass the guest leaves. There is always one
thing to be grateful forthat one is one's self
and not somebody else. "We thank thee,
oh loving Father," for these strange minds
that enamor us against Thee.
If I read
a book, and it makes my body so cold no

Page 114
other way?
How does the poet learn to grow,
or is it unconveyed, like witchcraft
or melody? I had no monarch
in my life and cannot rule myself. When I
try to organize, my little force explodes,
leaves me bare and charred. I marked a line in one
verse, because I met it after I
made it and never consciously touch
a paint mixed by another person. I do
not let go of it, because it is mine.
Two editors of journals came and asked me
for my mind. When I asked them, "Why?" they
said I was penuriousthey'd use it
for the world. I could not weigh my self myself
my size felt small to me. One hears of Mister
WhitmanI never read his book, but was told
he is disgraceful. To my thought, "To
publish" is foreign as firmament
to fin. My barefoot rank is better. If fame
belonged to me, I could not escape herif
she did not, the longest day would pass me on
the chase.
There seems a spectral power
in thought that walks alone. I find
ecstasy in livingthe mere sense of life
is joy enough. The chestnut hit my notice
suddenly, and I thought the skies in blossom!
Chanso
A French form, syllabic and rhymed. Lines can be of any single
length. It contains five or six identically structured stanzas, plus an

envoi that mirrors the structure of the last half of the stanza pattern.
Although the stanza pattern and rhyme scheme are rigid, the form is a
nonce form set by the poet.

Page 115
Chanson De Geste
see NARRATIVES.
Chant
see CHANT ROYAL and LYRICS.
Chante-Fable
A medieval French romance written in alternating verse and prose
passages.
Chantey
see LYRICS.
Chant Royal
A French form. Syllabic. Lines can be of any single length, but are
usually either octosyllabic or decasyllabic or, in accentual-syllabics,
iambic tetrameter or pentameter. There are sixty lines divided into
five, eleven-line stanzas and one, five-line envoy. The chant royal
turns on five rhymes and is built on a refrain. Strictly speaking, it is a
form of the BALLADE.
This scheme shows the structure of all stanzas:
lines
rhymes
1. a
2. b
3. a
4. b
5. C

6. C
7. d
8. d
9. e
10. d
11. Erefrain
This is the scheme of the envoy:
56. d
57. d
58. e
59. d
60. Erefrain

Page 116
For a contemporary example that uses consonance rather than true
rhyme, see Robert Morgan's "Chant Royal" in Strong Measures (op.
cit.).
Charms
see ANAGRAM and LYRICS.
Chaucerian Stanza
see RIME ROYAL.
Choka
The choka is a Japanese form. It can be of any length, as long as it is
written in alternating five- and seven-syllable lines and ends with a
seven-syllable line. It is unrhymed. For an example, see "Paradigm" in
the section on the kAtAuTA among FORENSICS. For forms related to the
choka, see the MONDO, KATAUTA, SEDOKA, TANKA, SOMONKA, RENGA, and HAIKU.
Choral Ode
see ODE.
Choriambics
Greek. Accentual-syllabic. A line consisting of, in this order, two
trochees, an iamb, a trochee, an iamb, a trochee, and two iambs.
Unrhymed. Poems can consist of any number of lines. The scheme for
one line:
line
meters
*xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Coming down the decayed stairs he began filing between the
slats
Cinquain
An American form. Syllabic or accentual-syllabic. Five lines long, the

Page 117
Here is the scheme in syllabics:
lines syllables
1. xx
2. XXXX
3. xxxXXX
4. XXXXXXX
5. xX
The following is an ancient Irish poem cast in the form of a
cinquainnote that it fulfills the bardic requirement that it end with the
same word it begins with:
Evil It Is
Evil
It is to shun
The king of righteousness
And to make a compact with the
Devil.
ANONYMOUS
Classical Hexameter
see HEXAMETER.
Classical Pentameter
see PENTAMETER.
Clerihew

A quatrain epigram in dipodic rhythms, rhyming aabb, the first line of
which is the name of a person. The three following lines give a
"capsule biography" that lampoons the person named.
Clogyrnach (clog-ír-nach)
A Welsh form. Syllabic. A sesteT sTanzA having lines with counts of
eight, eight, five, five, three, and three syllables, respectively (8-8-5-
5-3-3). The two, three-syllable lines may, if desired, be written as one,
six-syllable line. The rhyme scheme is aabbba.
A diagram of one stanza of clogyrnach follows:

Page 118
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. xxxxxxx
2. xxxxxxx
3. xxxxxb
4.xxxxxb
5. xx b
6. xx a
In Summer
Summer I love, stallions abroad,
Knights courageous before their lord;
The comber booming,
Apple tree blooming,
Shield shining, war-shouldered.
Longing, I went craving, alack
The bowing of the slim hemlock,
In bright noon, dawn's sleight;
Fair frail form smooth, white,
Her step light on the stalk.
Silent is the small deer's footfall,
Scarcely older than she is tall.
Comely, beautiful,
Bred bountiful,
Passion will heed her call,
But no vile word will pass her lips.
I pace, I pleadwhen shall we tryst?

Page 119
Common Measure
Accentual-syllabic. Rhymed. A quatraIn stanza Written in iambics, unlike
the podic Ballad stanza, which is otherwise similar. The rhyme scheme
is abcb. The first and third lines consist of four iambic feet; the second
and fourth lines, of three iambic feet. A simple scheme of the stanza
would thus be a4b3c4b3. A complete scheme would be:
lines
meters and raymes
1.
xx xx XX xa
2.
xxxx xb
3.
xx xx xx xc
4.
xxxx xb
For an example, see Robert Burns' "A Red, Red Rose" on p. 34.
HYMNAL STANZA is the same, except that it rhymes abab.
SHORT MEAsUre, a form of common measure, rhymes and meters
a3b3c4b3. SHort HyMNAL sTanzA is similar, а3b3а4b3:
The Elixir
Teach me, my God and King,
In all things thee to see,
And what I do in any thing,
To do it as for thee:
Not rudely, as a beast,
To run into an action;
But still to make thee prepossessed
And give it his perfection.
A man that looks on glass,
On it may stay his eye;
Or if he pleaseth, through it pass
And then the heaven espy.
All may of thee partake:

Page 120
Which with his tincture (for thy sake)
Will not grow bright and clean.
A servant with this clause
Makes drudgery divine:
Who sweeps a room, as for thy laws,
Makes that and the action fine.
This is the famous stone
That turneth all to gold:
For that which God doth touch and own
Cannot for less be sold.
GEORGE HERBERT
LoNG MeAsurE rhymes abcb, but all lines are iambic tetrameter, as are the
lines in LoNG HYMNAL STaNzA, which rhymes abab:
The Mourning of the Hare
By a forest I began to fare,
Walking by myself alone,
When I heard the mourning of a hare
Ruefully she made her moan:
"Dear worthy God, how shall I be living
And lead my life upon the land?
From dale to down am I driven;
Nowhere may I sit or stand!
"I may neither rest nor sleep
By any wallway ever so tall,
Nor no covert may me keep,
But ever I run from hole to hole.
"Hunters will not be remiss
In hope of hunting for to wend.
They leash their hounds more or less
And bring them to the far field's end;

Page 121
"All winter in the deepest snow
Men seek about to find my trace,
And by my footprints I am known
They follow me from place to place,
"And if I sit and crop the cale
Whenas the wife be in the way,
Shortly she swears, 'By the cock's soul,
There is a hare within my hay!'
"Ere ever I may start to flee,
The greyhounds run me to the grave;
My bowels they be thrown away,
And I am borne home on a stave."
ANONYMOUS
All forms of common measure and hymnal stanza can be doubled to
make OCTAVE STANzAs. These forms are called, respectively, COMMON OCTAVE,
HYMNAL OCTAVE, SHORT OCTAVE, SHORT HYMNAL OCTAVE, LONG OCTAVE, and LONG HYMNAL OCTAVE.
For an example of hymnal octave, see "Robin and Makyn" in the
section on the ECLOGUE DEBAT.
SHORT PARTICULAR MEASURE İS a SESteT stAnzA that has three iambic feet in lines
one, two, four, and five, and four feet in lines three and six. It usually
rhymes аза3b4аза3b4. For a reversal of this pattern, see RIME CoUE. This
poem is a variation of short particular measure:
A Song Out of the Italian
To thy lover,
Dear, discover
That sweet blush of thine that shameth
(When those roses
It discloses)
All the flowers that Nature nameth.
In free air

Page 122
For their golden
Locks to Phoebus' flaming tresses.
O deliver
Love his quiver,
From thy eyes he shoots his arrows
Where Apollo
Cannot follow,
Feathered with his mother's sparrows.
O envy not
(That we dye not)
Those dear lips whose door encloses
All the graces
In their places,
Brother pearls and sister roses.
From these treasures
Of ripe pleasures
One bright smile to clear the weather.
Earth and Heaven
Thus made even,
Both will be good friends together.
The air does woo thee,
Winds cling to thee,
Might a word once fly from out thee;
Storm and thunder
Would sit under,
And keep silence round about thee.
But if Nature's
Common creatures
So dear glories dare not borrow,
Yet thy beauty
Owes a duty
To my loving, lingering sorrow.

Page 123
Gild their faces,
And those terrors shall delight me!
When my dying
Life is flying,
Those sweet airs that often slew me
Shall revive me
Or reprieve me,
And to many deaths renew me.
RICHARD CRASHAW
Strong Measures (op. cit.) contains many examples of contemporary
poems written in the common measure forms.
Complaint
A verse monologue that complains of the state of the poet, of an
unrequited love or of a more trivial situation, and that begs for
easement. For a modern form of the complaint, see the BLUES STANZA.
Coronach
see DIRGE under LYRICS.
Couplet
Any two lines, written as a unit. A couplet can be any length and in
any meter. Most couplets rhyme aa, but this rhyme scheme is not a
requirement. There are several set forms.
The SHORT CoUPLeT is written in either iambic or trochaic tetrameter. The
pattern in iambics looks like this:
lines
meters and thymes
Xx XX xx xa
2.
xxxxxx xa
The sPLiT couPLer is also accentual-syllabic. It consists of two lines, the

Page 124
Lafe Grat
(from Bordello)
In this house I am not uglynowhere
else. Nor is there
a mirror in the room we use, my bought
bride and I. What
Images are reflected in her eyes
I recognize
as in a dream only, my face redrawn
by night. Reborn
each evening of this woman, spared my name,
the cruel fame
of the publicly disfigured, I roar
with my old whore
like a whole man, transfigured for a time.
Sordid? I am
Lafe Grat. I work hard to make a living.
There's no giving
to a man who makes you think of darkness,
for my likeness
is found buried in everyone, hidden
till, unbidden,
it rises to gorge the beast in the blood.
So, out of mud
I am formed and rise each morning to stalk
where others walk
in a world of surfacestill night when,
like other men,
I may purchase with coin my manhood, life
a moment's wife.

L. T.
The following poem is written in SESTET NONCE STANZAS. The first four lines
are two split couplets, the last two lines of each stanza form a HEROIC
COUPLET.
On a Sea-Storm Nigh the Coast
All round the horizon black clouds appear;
a storm is near:

Page 125
Darkness eclipseth the serener sky,
The winds are high,
Making the surface of the Ocean show
Like mountains lofty, and like valleys low.
The weighty seas are rowled from the deeps
In mighty heaps,
And from the rocks' foundations do arise
To kiss the skies.
Wave after wave in hills each other crowds,
As if the deeps resolved to storm the clouds.
How did the surging billows foam and roar
Against the shore
Threatening to bring the land under their power
And it devour:
Those liquid mountains on the cliffs were hurled
As to a chaos they would shake the world.
The Earth did interpose the Prince of Light,
"Twas sable night:
All darkness was but when the lightnings fly
And light the sky,
Night, thunder, lightning, rain, and raging wind,
To make a storm had all their forces joined.
RICHARD STEERE
An ALExAnDRINe couPLeT is made of two rhyming alexandrIne lines and is often
used as a coda, as in the heroic couplets above.
The QAsIDa, an Arabic form, consists of any number of couplets, up to
one hundred, all turning on the same rhyme:
Delight in Books from Evening
Delight in books from evening
Till midnight when the cocks do sing;

Page 126
Yea, even how to please the king.
Delight in books, they're carrying
Us so far, that we know to fling
On waspish men (who, taking wing,
Surround us) that they can not sting.
FRANCIS DANIEL PASTORIUS
For another example of the qasida, see Robert Herrick's "Anacrontick
Verse" under ANACREoNTIcS in the section on LYRICS.
There are three Welsh couplets, all of them syllabic. CyHYDeDD FER (cuh-
hée-dedd ver) is a rhymed couplet, each line containing eight
syllables; for an example, see the last couplet of "Huntsong for a
Small Son" in BYR A THODDAID.
Each line of the crwyd DevaIr ryrion (ców-idd dyé-ire vúhr-yon) contains
four syllables, and it is rhymed:
My Choice
I choose a fair
Maid so slender
Tall and silver,
Her gown of heather
Huel choose her,
Nature's daughter,
For the kind word
Dropped, scarcely heard,
And for my part
Take her to heart
For gift, for grace,
For her embrace.
I choose the wave,
The water's shade;
Witch of the shire,

Page 127
I choose my course
Without remorse,
With a clear voice
So clear a choice.
HYWEL AB OWAIN GWYNEDD
CYWyDD DEUAIR HIRION (ców-idd dyé-ire heer-yon) is a light-rhyming,
seven-syllable coupletthat is, the first line is masculine (ending on a
stressed syllable) and the second line is feminine (ending on an
unstressed syllable). Because of this stress requirement, the prosody
of this form is properly not syllabics but syllabic-accentuals, as
distinguished from accentual-syllabics. The lines rhyme aa. A
possible schematic diagram for two couplets (note that the stress
pattern, except for the light rhymes, is not regular) would be:
syllables, rhymes,
syllables, rhymes,
lines
I.
2.
stresses
*xxxxx*
xxxxxxa
lines
3-
4.
stresses
xxxxxxb
xxxxxxb
Lament for Owain Ab Urien
Owain ab Urien's soul
May the Lord keep immortal.
Lordly to praise Rheged's lord,
Greatly burdened by greensward,
Laid low, this far-bruited king,
His lances wings of dawning.
To none other was he thrall,
No other was his equal,
Reaper of foes, ravener,
Son, father, and grandfather.
When Owain scythed down Fflamddwyn
It was no more than nodding.
Sleeping are the Anglemen,
Light in their sockets open,

Page 128
Owain put them to the sack:
Sheep before the wolf-pack.
Grand in colored armament,
Well he horsed the suppliant:
For his soul's sake Owain shared
The treasure that he hoarded.
Owain ab Urien's soul
May the Lord keep immortal.
TALIESIN
For other set forms of the couplet, see the sections on DIDACTICS, HEROICS,
and POULTER'S MEASURE. See also the LaMenT in the section on LYRIcs.
Synonyms for couplet are DIsTIcH and IWIME.
Cyhydedd Fer
see COUPLET.
Cyhydedd Hir (cuh-hée-dedd heer)
Welsh. Syllabic. OcTAvEsTaNzas composed of two QuAtraIns, each of
whose four lines consist of five, five, five, and four (5-5-5-4)
syllables, respectively. Each quatrain may, if desired, be arranged as a
single, nineteen-syllable line. The five-syllable lines in each quatrain
rhyme with one another; the four-syllable lines carry the main rhyme.
Strictly speaking, the stanzas need not be octave stanzas. Any number
of quatrains can be used in a stanza and, technically, the meter will
remain cyhydedd hir. However, within any stanza the short lines must
carry the same rhyme.
The scheme of two octave stanzas would be:
linessyllables and
rhymes

1. xxxxa
2. xxxxa
3. xxxx а
4. XXX B
5. xXXXC
7. XXXXC
8. XXX B
9. xXXXd
10.xxxxd
11. xxxxd
12. XXXE
13.xXXXİ
14.xXXXİ
15.xxxxİ
16. xxX E

Page 129
To a Girl
I saw on the face
Of a haughty lass
A look with no trace
Of lovecold, still:
The cresting spume-glow
Upon the billow
Of the sea's face, flow
And ebb of chill.
She sends her respects
To me, harshly, vexed
The candle rejects,
Cuts shadow dead,
And now I must hoard
Disgrace's great hurt
She's trod on my heart,
Sought Greeneye's bed!
CYNDDELW BRYDYDD MAWR
Cyhydedd Naw Ban (cuh-hée-dedd naw ban)
Welsh. Syllabic. A line of nine syllables. It must rhyme with at least
one other line of equal length to form a couplet. It can continue the
rhyme throughout the stanza, which can be of any length, provided
that all lines are equal in length.
The scheme for two lines is:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1.xxxxxxxxа
2.XXXXXXXXа

This form should not be confused with the QasIDa. The following
example is an excerpt, the first stanza only of a much longer poem:
In Praise of Owain Gwynedd
I hail a boonsman hearty in war,
Battlewolf, boastful, first to the fore
I sing of serving him with fervor,

Page 130
Sing his mead-fed and worthy power,
Sing his ardor, this wind-winged falcon,
Sing his thoughts, lofty as the welkin,
Sing his dauntless deeds, lord of frayhounds,
Sing his praisesthey may know no bounds,
Sing odes for my magnanimous thane;
I sing paeans of praise for Owain.
CYNDDELW BRYDYDD MAWR
Cyrch a Chwta (kirch a chóo-tah)
Welsh. Syllabic. An ocrave stanza of six rhyming or consonating, seven-
syllable lines plus a couplet, the second line of which rhymes with the
first six lines. The first line of the couplet, line seven (7), cross-
rhymes into the third, fourth, or fifth syllable of line eight (8). The
scheme for one stanza is:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1.xxxxxxа
2. xxxxxxa
3. xxxxxx
4. xxxxxx
5. xXXXXXa
6. xxxXXXa
7.xxxxxxb
8. xxxbxxa
Cywydd Deuair Fyrion

see COUPLET.
Cywydd Deuair Hirion
see COUPLET.
Cywydd Llosgyrnog (ców-idd llos-gír-nog)
A Welsh form. Syllabic. A sestet stanza, the lines having respective
syllable counts of eight, eight, seven, eight, eight, and seven (8-8-7-8-
8-7). Lines one (1) and two (2) rhyme and cross-rhyme with the
middle syllable of line three (3); lines four (4) and five (5) rhyme and
cross-rhyme with the middle syllable of line six (6); lines three (3) and
six (6) rhyme with each other. This form should not be confused

Page 131
with rIme couéE, which has a similar rhyme scheme. Here is the
schematic for a stanza:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. xxxxxxx
2.xxxxxxxа
3. xxxxxb
4.XXXXXXXС
5.XXXXXXXC
The Rule of Three
When I consider these things three
I may never then go blithely:
I shall, firstly, wend away;
Secondly, I know not the hour.
The third fills me with my most fear
I know not where I shall stray.
ANONYMOUS
Deachnadh Mor
see RANNAIGHEACHTS.
Debat, Debate
see FORENSICS.
Decastich

Any ten-line poem.
Deibhidhe (jay-vée)
Irish. Syllabic-accentual. A quatrain stanza light-rhyming in couplets.
There is alliteration between two words in each line, the final word of
line four (4) alliterating with the preceding stressed word. There are at
least two cross-rhymes between lines three (3) and four (4). Each line
has seven syllables.
The poem (not the stanza) ends with the same first syllable, word, or
line with which it begins (the poem given here as an example does not
observe this convention). The diagram for one stanza:

Page 132
lines
2.
4.
syllables, rhymes, stressed endings
xxxxxx
xxxxxxa
xbxxxxb
xxxxxb
The Death of Conain
The shining tides rise and swell,
Swing him in his coracle,
Break across the sandy strand:
Conain looks out at the land,
Then she whose white hair he grips
Hair of spindrift, frigid lips
Fleers and turns her phlegm to foam
On the tomb that was his home.
ANONYMOUS
Descort
A French form whose only requirement is that each line of the poem
be different from every other line in all ways (discordant). The descort
mixes meters, line-lengths, and stanza lengths and is itself of no fixed
length.
Didactics
Didactics is a minor subgenre of the literary genre called poetry.
Didactic poetry is instructional (teaching poetry); its purpose is to give
instructions or information regarding some subject. There are
traditionally four didactic forms in English literature.
The EPIsTLE is a loose form, a letter to someone in particular or to
mankind in general:

Page 133
An Epistle to Two Friends
To Dr. Helsham
Nov. 23, at night, 1731.
Sir,
When I left you, I found myself of the grape's juice sick;
I'm so full of pity I never abuse sick;
And the patientest patient ever you knew sick;
Both when I am purge-sick, and when I am spew-sick.
I pitied my cat, whom I knew by her mew sick:
She mended at first, but now she's anew sick.
Captain Butler made some in the church black and blue sick.
Dean Cross, had he preached, would have made us all pew-
sick.
Are not you, in a crowd when you sweat and you stew, sick?
Lady Santry got out of the church when she grew sick,
And as fast as she could, to the deanery flew sick.
Miss Morice was (I can assure you 'tis true) sick:
For, who would not be in that numerous crew sick?
Such music would make a fanatic or Jew sick,
Yet, ladies are seldom at ombre or loo sick.
Nor is old Nanny Shales, whene'er she does brew, sick.
My footman came home from the church of a bruise sick,
And looked like a rake, who was made in the stews sick:
But you learned doctors can make whom you choose sick:
And poor I myself was, when I withdrew, sick:
For the smell of them made me like garlic and rue sick,
And I got through the crowd, though not led by a clew, sick.
Yet hoped to find many (for that was your cue) sick;
But there was not a dozen (to give them their due) sick,
And those, to be sure, stuck together like glue sick.
So are ladies in crowds, when they squeeze and they screw, sick;
You may find they are all, by their yellow pale hue, sick;
So am I, when tobacco, like Robin, I chew, sick.

Page 134
And I wish I may soon be not of an ague sick;
But I hope I shall ne'er be like you, of a shrew sick,
Who often has made me, by looking askew, sick.
JONATHAN SWIFT
The PRIMeR CouPLeT, a set form, is a dipodic couplet, rhyming aa. Usually,
primer couplets are rhymed aphorisms:
Obadiah
Obadiah
Jumped in the fire,
Fire was hot,
He jumped in the pot,
The pot was so little
He jumped in the kettle,
The kettle was so black
He jumped in the crack,
The crack was so high
He jumped in the sky,
The sky was so blue
He jumped in the canoe,
The canoe was so deep
He jumped in the creek,
The creek was so shallow
He jumped in the tallow,
The tallow was so hard
He jumped in the lard,
The lard was so soft
He jumped in the loft,
The loft was so rotten
He fell in the cotton,
The cotton so warm
He stayed till the morn.
ANONYMOUS

Page 135
Three Riddles from the Anglo-Saxon
i.
The world's wonder,
I liven wenches,
A boon to townsfolk,
a bane to none,
Though haply I prick
her who picks me.
Well planted,
I stand in a bed
With my rogue root.
Rarely, mayhap,
Some carline,
careless and daring,
Rasps my red tip,
wrenches my head,
Lays me to larder.
I teach her lore,
This curly-hair
who clasps me thus,
And after our meeting
moisten her eye.
ii.
Fire-fretted,
I flirt with wind;
Limbs light-fraught,
I strive to fly:
A grove of leaves,
a glowing flinder.
Hand to hand,
I ring the hall
Lords and ladies
love to toast me.
When I heighten

Page 136
ili.
Swung at thigh,
a wizard thing!
Below his belt,
beneath the folds
Of robes I dangle
with my single eye.
Stiff and stout,
I swivel about.
Aiming the head
of his well-hung tool,
My holder hoists
his hem knee-high:
He wants to fill
a famous hole
That I fit well
at length and more
What will be filled
has been filled before.
ANONYMOUS
Answers: (i) an onion; (ii) a wooden torch; (iii) a key.
Georgics are rhymed instructions or directions in the arts, sciences, or
tradesversified handbooks. An excellent modern georgic is David
Wagoner's "Staying Alive," widely anthologized and included in
Poetry: An Introduction (op. cit.). See also BestiAry for another didactic
form.
The classical discourse is a model structure for expository writing:
A. Subject. The subject of the discourse is given in the title.
B. Thesis. The exordium is the statement of the subject being
examined and an introduction to the author's thesis. It differs from the
subject in that it is a complete statement, usually given in one

Page 137
2. The confirmatio is the list of arguments, proofs, and facts
backing the thesis. It is usually arranged in the order of weakest
argument to strongest (climactic).
3. The refutatio is the rebuttal of all possible arguments to the
contrary. It is usually arranged in the order of strongest argument to
weakest (anticlimactic).
D. Conclusion. The peroratio is an appeal to emotion as well as to
logic the restatement of the proved thesis, and the conclusion of the
discourse.
The poem "The Old Professor," in Poetry: An Introduction (op. cit.),
is a classical discourse. Alexander Pope's Essay on Criticism is a
pertinent verse essay as well, but too long to quote here. It is,
however, easily available. Some didactic techniques commonly found
in the classical discourse and in other arguments follow:
Apophasis is the rhetorical technique of denying your intention to
speak about a particular point, at the same time, mentioning it"I don't
intend to mention the fact that Mr. Jones was convicted for larceny."
Metastasis is the technique of flitting quickly from one argument to
another, much as a boxer bobs and weaves so that his opponent cannot
get a good shot at him.
Paragon is the argumentative technique of quickly summing up and
rejecting all reasons for making a particular point, except the one
reason the arguer believes to be valid.
Parecnasis is the technique of digression, leaving the main argument
for a time to talk of other things that, for the moment, may not seem
pertinent, but that, in fact, bolster the main point when it is returned
to.

Page 130
Diminishing Verse
see ECHO VERSE.
Dirge
Distich
see COUPLET.
Dit
see CORONACH, MONODY, THRENODY.
see EXEMPLUM.
Dithyramb
see LYRICS.
Ditty
see LYRICS.
Dizain
see BALLADE.
Double Acrostic
see ACROSTIC.
Double Ballade
see BALLADE.
Double Ballade Supreme
see BALLADE.
Dramatic Monologue

see DRAMATICS.
Dramatics
A major subgenre of poetry, dramatic works are written to be spoken
aloud. There are several stage forms:
TraGeDy is a form of verse drama in which a heroic protagonist
struggles to avoid his or her inevitable defeat (fate). Its elements are
the balance of pathos and terror as the protagonist courageously faces
the human predicament; the paradox of nobility of character combined
with human fallibility; theatrical narration by means of concrete,
mimetic stage actions; masked or stylized characters who are
representative not of abstractions as such but, first, of historical or
mythological figures and, second, of types of people; two choruses,
usually representative of Everyman, that comment on the action; and a
set, formal structure consisting of speeches, odes, choral odes, and
stylized stage actions of various kinds. An example of a modern
tragedy is T. S. Eliot's Murder in the Cathedral.
CoMeDY is tragedy burlesqued. The protagonist is a humorous, not an
empathetic, character, and the stages leading to his/her defeat or,
possibly, triumph are humorous as well.
TrAGIcoMeDY is a verse or a compound-mode drama. It combines tragedy
and comedy, usually in a plot-subplot relationship. Good is rewarded
and vice punished.

Page 139
The mask is a relatively short verse or compound-mode drama
performed by masked figures. It includes songs, speeches, dances,
mimes, and spectacle. It was a forerunner of opera. Current masks are
largely literary rather than dramatice. e. cummings wrote masks,
among them one called Santa Claus, and Frost wrote some as well,
including A Masque of Mercy.
The MORALITY PLAY is a verse or compound-mode allegory in the form of a
play. It rehearses the pilgrimage of man's progress toward death and
his hope of salvation from sin through repentance and submission to
God's mercy. Other than the pilgrimage, the elements are the
psychomachia, or the strife of the Seven Deadly Sins aided by the
Vices with the Four Cardinal and Three Theological Virtues over
possession of Everyman's soul, and the totentanz or Dance of Death.
Other personified abstractions are Conscience, Conviction of Sin, and
Repentance.
The MYsTErY PLAY is based upon the Biblical story of man's Creation, Fall,
and Redemption; the mracteplay is concerned with the life and
martyrdom of a saint; and the PAssIoN Play deals with the events in the
life of Christ before the Resurrectionbetween the Last Supper and the
Crucifixion.
The NoH PLAY is a Japanese compound-mode drama, somewhat similar to
the mask and to tragedy. It is allusive and impressionistic. It uses
traditional subjects, masked figures, a chorus, mime, dance, music,
and choreographed movement. William Butler Yeats wrote modern
plays that were influenced by the noh.
Most poets today, however, write primarily for the page, and there are
three general forms outside drama proper:
A DIALOGUE is a conversation among two or more characters.

Page 140
phyria's Lover" by Robert Browning is an easily available example.
The third literary form, the soloquy, is similar to the monologue, but
the speaker is assumed to be alone, and his/her speech consists of
private thoughts put into words:
The Dream
I dreamed I saw myself lie dead,
And that my bed my coffin grew;
Silence and sleep this strange sight bred,
But waked, I found I loved anew.
Looking next morn on your bright face,
My eyes bequeathed my heart fresh pain;
A dart rushed in with every grace,
And so I killed myself again:
O eyes, what shall distressed lovers do,
If open you can kill, if shut you view?
WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT
An EcLoGuE is a short pastoral dialogue, monologue, or soliloquy.
Droighneach (dráiy-nach)
Irish. Syllabic. A loose sTANzA form. The single line can consist of from
nine to thirteen syllables, and it always ends in a trisyllabic word.
There is rhyming between lines one (1) and three (3), two (2) and four
(4), etc. There are at least two cross-rhymes in each couplet, and
alliteration in each lineusually the final word of the line alliterates
with the preceding stressed word, and it always does so in the last line
of each stanza. Stanzas can consist of any number of quatrains.
The poem (not the stanza) ends with the same first syllable, word, or
line with which it begins. A possible scheme would be:

Page 141
linessyllables and rhymes
1.xxxxxx (xxa)
3. xxxxxb(xxa)
4. xxxxxx (xxb)
6. XXXXXXXXX(X
x d)
7.XXdXXXXXX(XX
8. XXXXCX (xXd)
Echo Verse
Any verse form written so that the last few words or syllables, when
repeated at the end of each line, form a response to the line, as in the
example given in the section on the BREF DOUBLE, "Bref Double à l' Écho."
In that poem, it is possible for the repeated words to be read as a
separate poem that responds to the main poem as a whole, in addition
to the individual lines.
Another form of echo verse is DIminıshing verse, in which letters or sounds
are deleted from the first part of the last word in successive lines of
each stanza:
Paradise

I bless thee, lord, because I grow
Among thy trees, which in a row
To thee both fruit and order owe.
What open force, or hidden charm
Can blast my fruit, or bring me harm,
While the inclosure is thine arm?
Inclose me still for fear I start.
Be to me rather sharp and tart,
Than let me want thy hand and art.
When thou dost greater judgements spare,
And with thy knife but prune and pare,
Even fruitful trees more fruitful are.
Such sharpness shows the sweetest friend:
Such cuttings rather heal than rend:
And such beginnings touch their end.
GEORGE HERBERT

Page 142
Eclogue
see BUCOLICS, DRAMATICS.
Eclogue Debat
A form of BUCOLICS, DIDACTICS, DRAMATIcS, and ForensIcs, this form is an
argument between country lovers. The example here is written in
HYMNAL OCTAVE (SeE COMMON MEASURE):
Robin and Makyn
Robin sat on a good green hill,
Keeping a flock was he,
Merry Makyn near him till,
"Robin, have ruth for me;
I have loved thee loud and still
For years now two or three,
Doleful in secret; unless thou will,
I fear I shall doubtless die."
Robin answered, "By the Rood,
Nothing of love I know
But keeping my sheep under yon wood
Lo! where they wander a-row:
What has marred thee in thy mood,
Makyn, I beg thou show;
Or what is love, or to be loved?
Fain would I learn that law."
"At love's lair, to learn its lore
Take there this a-b-c:
Be kind, courteous, and fair as fair,
Wise, generous, hearty
So that thou need not to endure
What hidden hurts may harm thee;
Fight thy pain with all thy power,

Have patience and be privy."
Robin answered her again,
"I know not what is love,
But I am marvelous uncertain
What makes thee thus to grieve:

Page 143
The weather is fair, I have no pain,
My hale sheep climb above;
And should we play upon this plain,
We both would earn reproof."
"Robin, pay heed unto my tale,
Work all as I have said,
And thou shalt have my heart all hale,
Aye, and my maidenhead.
Since God sends thee beauty for bale,
And mourning is remade,
I plead with thee, if I turn tail,
Doubtless I am but dead."
"Makyn, this morning it may betide,
While ye waylay me here,
My sheep may hap to stray aside
While we have lain full near;
I fret this moment as I bide
That they shall disappear
What freights my heart I will not hide;
Makyn, be of good cheer."
"Robin, thou rob my ruth and rest;
I love but thee alone."
"Makyn, adieu, the sun goes west,
The day is nearly gone."
"Robin, I grieve, I am distressed
That love will be my bane."
"Go love, Makyn, wherever thou list,
For mistresses I want none."
"Robin, I stand in such a stall;
I sigh, and that full sore."
"Makyn, I have been here this while;
At home God grant I were."
"My honey, Robin, talk awhile,

Page 144
Upon his own way Robin went
Light as the leaf of a tree;
Makyn, spited of her intent,
Watched Robin across the lea
And vowed to spurn him without stint.
Then Makyn cried out on high,
"Now may thou sing, for I am spent!
What ails this love in me?"
Makyn went home and did not fail,
Weary of learning to weep.
Then Robin in a full-fair dale
Gathered together his sheep,
When some part of what made Makyn ail
Into his heart did creep;
He followed her fast till he could hale
And tell her, "Take good keep!
"Abide, abide, thou fair Makyn,
One word for anything;
For all my love, it shall be thine,
Without any departing.
O take my heart, for to have thine
Is all my coveting;
My sheep till tomorrow's hours nine
Will need of no keeping."
"Robin, thou has heard sing and say
In gestes and stories old,
The man that will not when he may
Shall have not when he would.
I pray that Jesus every day
Increase their cares and cold
Who shall contend with thee to play
By firth, forest, or fold."
"Makyn, the night is soft and dry,

Page 145
Upon our trysting there;
Therein, Makyn, both ye and I,
Unseen we may repair."
"Robin, that world is all away
And quite brought to an end,
And never again after today
Shall I come as thou wend;
For of my pain thou made but play,
Vainly did my bough bend;
As thou hast done, so shall I say,
'Mourn on, I think to mend."
"Makyn, the hope of all my weal,
My heart on thee is set,
And ever to thee shall I kneel
While I have blood to let;
Never to fail, as others fail,
Whatever grace I get."
"Robin, with thee I will not deal;
Adieu, for thus we met."
Makyn went home, blithe anew,
Across the forest floor;
Robin mourned, and Makyn flew,
She sang, he sighed full sore;
And so she left him woe and rue
In care and in dolor,
Keeping his herd beside a sleugh
Upon the forest floor.
ROBERT HENRYSON
Edda Measures
Norse. Accentual. There are three EDDA MEAsures, all of which are
alliterative (similar to ANGLO-SAXON PROSODY):

OLD STORY MEASURE İS a QUATRAIN StAnza, each stich of which has four stresses,
split by a central caesura into two hemistichs of two stresses each. The
third stressed syllable in each line always alliterates with either or
both of the first two stressed syllables; the fourth stressed syllable
never does, al-

Page 146
though it may cross-alliterate with the following line. In each
hemistich there are two, sometimes three, unstressed syllables. A
possible scheme would be:
lines
1.
stresses, alliterations, caesurae
6xbx xbox
2.
3.
4.
xxkk•×k×Íx
SPEECH MEASURE İS a QUATRAIN STANZa, each line of which has four stresses,
split by a central caesura into two hemistichs of two stresses each. The
third stressed syllable in each line always alliterates with either or
both of the first two stressed syllables; the fourth stressed syllable
never does, though it may cross-alliterate with the following line. In
each hemistich there are three or four unstressed syllables:
bxxex x*xx*x
I.
2.
3-
4.
xmxmx-×mxxń×
SONG MEASURE iS alsO a QUATRAIN STaNza. Lines one (1) and three (3) have four
stresses, split by a central caesura into two hemistichs of two stresses
each. The third stressed syllable in these lines always alliterates with
either or both of the first two stressed syllables; the fourth stressed
syllable never does, though it may cross-alliterate with the following
line. In each hemistich there may be two or three unstressed syllables.
Lines two (2) and four (4) of the quatrain contain three stressed
syllables, two of which alliterate. There is no caesura, and there are up
to four unstressed syllables in the line. The scheme for the form would
be:

Page 147
1.
2.
bxxc cxxdx
xxxx/g
3-
4.
×k××Íxí
In the following example of song measure, some liberties have been
taken with the form:
The Monks' Massacre
From the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for the Year 1083
Those were drear days and dire
At the abbey of Glastonbury
When Thurstan came from Caen to become
Abbot of the English monks.
But a little wit and less wisdom
Had the Abbot Thurstan.
In many matters he misruled the monks
They suffered at first in stillness.
At last they complained in a kindly way,
Asked him to rule them rightly;
They would be steadfast in all he asked
if the abbot would but love them.
Thurstan would think no thoughts of the sort,
But made them give up St. Gregory
And chant his French chansos instead
The foolish songs of Fécamp.
He treated them woefully, threatened worse
Till one day he went into chapter
And spoke against them, swore to ill-treat them.
He called for his layman knights
Who fell on the monks fully armed
The monks were stricken to stone,
Bewildered at first, fearful and helpless
Before the furious onslaught.
At last they scatteredsome of them fled

Page 148
The French knights followed the monks
Into the monastery, meaning
To drag them forth, for they dared not go
To face the abbot's henchmen.
But a heavy thing happened that day:
The French forced the choir
And threw missiles at the monks below
Gathered about the altar,
And some from above, in the upper storey,
Shot arrows altarward
Where the wretched monks writhed
Beneath the shaft-struck cross.
Some cried to God and crept beneath
The altar, asking of Him
The mercy their fellow men denied them.
Yet more fiercely the French
Shot their shafts and, shouting, broke
Down the doors of the chapel,
Killed some monks and wounded more
Till, spilling down
Out from under the altar of God,
The blood of the brothers flowed
About the boots of the brave French
And their thirsty abbot Thurstan.
ANONYMOUS
Elegiac Couplet, Elegiac Distich
see ELEGIACS.
Elegiacs
Greek. Quantitative accentual-syllabics. A coupleT measure. The first
line is a CLASSICAL HExAMETER: the first four feet are either spondees or
dactyls, the fifth foot is a dactyl, the sixth is a spondee. The second
line of the couplet is a CLASsicAL Pentameter, consisting, in this order, of

Page 149
lines
I.
2.
meters
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
XxxXXXXXxxxxxx
A Talisman
For Dave McLean
Lead for this talisman. Pure, so that Saturn will live in it. Pure
lead.
Both of its faces are rubbed smooth. On its front, in a star
pentagram, cut with a diamond burin a scythe so that Nabam,
standing upon his demoniac pedestal Tau, shall be laid low
old as he isby Oriphiel, angel of Saturday. Jesus,
nailed to a T, is the capstone of this coin made of lead,
though he will never appear in his person, but only as
backdrop.
Grave on the opposite face this, in a six-pointed star:
REMPHA, surrounding the head of a bull. Without witnesses
carve your
talisman. Wear it in good health. It will keep you from death,
frighten the devil of cancer, leukemiarot of the white bone.
Marrow will redden. Wear this! It will save you and me.
Bear ityour talisman; wear it, my brother. Or carry this
poem,
Dies Saturni, to life's end. It is all I can do.
WESLI COURT
Elegiacs was the classical meter in which elegies were written. An
elegy is a mournful song, a reflection on the passing of time or on
death. See also the ELegy and PASTorAL ELEGY in the section on LYRICS.
Richard Moore's "Friends" and Miller Williams' "For Victor Jara" in
Strong Measures (op. cit.) are other examples of contemporary
elegiacs.
Elegy
see ELEGIACS.

Enclosed Tercet
see TERCET.
Enclosed Triplet
see TRIPLET.
English Ode
see ODE.

Page 150
English Sonnet
see SONNET.
Englyns (én-glin)
Welsh. Syllabic. There are eight types of englyns. Six of them, those
treated in this section, are QUATRAIN STANZAS.
ENGLyn cyrcH (én-glin kirch) has seven syllables in each line. Lines one
(1) and two (2) turn on a single rhyme. Line three (3) cross-rhymes
into one of the three central syllables of line four (4):
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. xxxxxx
2. xxxxxx
3.xxxxxxb
4. xxxxbxa
Gnomic Verses
Frost shall freeze, fire will eat wood,
Ice will bridge and the earth brood.
Water shall wear winter's shield,
Yet the field will be renewed.
Frost's fetters shall free the grain,
Wonderlock will yield to rain,
And there shall be fair weather
When the winter goes to wane.
Sunwarmed summer! What was dumb

Shall find voice. The body, numb
When the deep wave was most dark,
Will feel when the lark has come.
ANONYMOUS
Each line of ENGLYN LLEDDrBROEST (én-glin llédd-uhv-broyst) diphthong-
rhymes with the others and has a count of seven syllables. In Welsh,
the rhymes used were the four diphthongs ae, oe, wy, and ei. Since
this structure is impossible to reproduce in English, any similar
diphthongs can be substituted and can be considered to rhyme with
one another. Here is a one stanza schematic:

Page 151
linessyllables and diphthong
rhymes
1. xxxxxx ое
2.xxXxxxwy
3. x xxxx x ei
4. xxxxxx ae
ENGLYN PROEST DALGRoN (én-glin proyst dál-gron) has seven syllables in
each line. All the lines consonate with one another on vowels or
similar diphthongs:
The Grave
Everman comes to the dank earth.
Folk, forlorn and small, perish.
What wealth rears is wracked by death.
In an hour dirt devoureth.
Great maw, end of what I clutch,
What I loved you turn to filth.
Mine will be a chill stone hearth
Life was not meant for a youth.
Each man's cold estate is death;
He walks alone on the heath
That will take him in its clinch,
Come at last to the cromlech.
DAFYDD BENFRAS
In ENGLYN PROEST GADwynoG (én-glin proyst ga-dóy-nog), each line has seven
syllables. Lines one (1) and three (3) rhyme; lines two (2) and four (4)
consonate with lines one (1) and three (3) and with each other:

linessyllables, consonances, and
rhymes
1.xxxxxxr
2. xxxxxx or
3. xXXXXX
4. xXXXXXOr
ENGLyn UNoDL crwca (én-glin éen-oddle créw-cah) has lines with syllable
counts of seven, seven, ten, and six (7-7-10-6), respectively. Lines one
(1), two (2), and four (4)

Page 152
end with the main rhyme. In line three (3), the main rhyme is followed
by one, two, or three syllables that are echoed by assonance,
alliteration, or secondary rhyme in the first part of the fourth line:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. XXXXXXA
2.XXXXXXA
3. XXXXXXAXX
b
4. ×bxxxA
ENGLYN UnodL union (én-glin éen-oddle éen-yon) merely shifts the
positions of the two couplets that make up englyn unodl crwca: lines
three (3) and four (4) of the latter become lines one (1) and two (2),
and lines one (1) and two (2) become lines three (3) and four (4) of
the englyn unodl union.
Envelope, Envelope Stanza
see QUATRAIN.
Envoi
An envoi, or envoy, was originally the concluding half-stanza of verse
forms such as the BALLADE or the CHANT ROYAL. One of its traditional
functions was to provide the denouement for what had been said in the
body of the poem, or to apostrophize it and send it on its way to its
intended audience.
Detached from the verse form for which it was a tail or coda, the

envoi retains its function as a dedication. For an example, see
Chaucer's "Complaint to His Purse" in the section on the BALLADE.
Epic
see NARRATIVES.
Epicedium
An ElEcy for the dead delivered by a chorus. See OBseQu.
Epigram
see SATIRICS.

Page 153
Epistle
see DIDACTICS and SOMONKA.
Epitaph
see SATIRICS.
Epithalamion, Epithalamium
see LYRICS.
Epyllion
A "little EpIc," originally composed in dactylic hexameter verse. See
NARRATIVES.
Evensong
A formal lyric prayer to be sung in the evening. See LITURGIcs.
Fable, Fabliau
see DIDACTICS and NARRATIVES.
Flyting
see FORENSICS.
Folk Ballad
see BALLAD.
Forensics
Forensics is the minor poetic subgenre of debate and argument.
Several forms are associated with it, including the DeBat, in which
opposing parties contend (see Robert Henryson's "Robin and Makyn"
under ECLOGUE DEBAT).

A set Spanish form of the debat is the pregunta, in which one poet asks
a question (requesta) or series of questions, and another gives the
reply (respuesta) or series of replies. The following poem, written in
the form of a pregunta, was penned by a single poet:
Upon Love, by Way of Question and Answer
I bring ye love, Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Like, and dislike ye;
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Stroke ye to strike ye;
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Love will befool ye;
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Heat ye to cool ye;
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Love gifts will send ye;

Page 154
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Stock ye to spend ye;
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Love will fulfill ye;
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Kiss ye to kill ye.
ROBERT HERRICK
A Japanese form of question and answer is the kaTauta, which is based
on the utterance: a spontaneous, emotive word or phrase. Such an
utterance formalized is the basic katautaa question or its answer. "Am
I in love?" is a katauta, as is its spontaneous and intuitive answer:
"Birds are flying:" A pair of such katautas, that is, a question plus its
answer, is a MoNDo:
Am I in love? Birds are flying.
Mondos can appear in parallel constructions of various kinds, as in
this cross-parallel (see chiasmus) set:
Am I in love? Birds are flying.
Do birds fly? I am in love.
To the Occidental eye, this verse looks much like a syllogism
Grass is green.
Bluegrass is grass.
Bluegrass is green.
The katauta answer, however, is not logical, it is intuitive. This point
is important, for although Western arguments are based in rational
thinking, certain kinds of Oriental debate are based on intuition, as for
instance in Zen Buddhism.
A set form of the kataura consists of three parts arranged in lines of 5-
7-7 syllables, unrhymed:

Page 155
linessyllables
1. xxxxx
2.XXXXXX
3. xXXXXX
X
The line-lengths are approximately breath-length (like William Carlos
Williams' American equivalent of this systemhis "breath-pause"
concept of line-phrasing where each line equals one phrasesee the
TRIvERsEN) or the appropriate lengths to ask a sudden, emotive question
and respond to it, also emotively. Seventeen or nineteen syllables are
therefore about as many as can normally be uttered in one short
breath; five to seven syllables are approximately equal to the utterance
of a question or its answer.
In Williams' variable accentuals variation of this concept (he called it
the "variable foot," which is misleading since no "verse foot," strictly
speaking, is involved), two to four stresses are approximately equal to
an utterance, and six to twelve accents are as many as can be uttered
in a short breath. Thus, in Williams' prosody, each line is a phrase of
about two to four stresses, and three lines equal a clause of about six
to twelve stresses. Williams' system, however, does not necessarily
have anything to do with questions and answers.
The three-line KATAurA is the basic and organic unit of Japanese syllabic
poetry, which culminated in the development of the HAku. Here is a
poem that illustrates some of the Japanese syllabic forms, while it
parallels the development of the forms leading up to the haiku:

Page 156
The trees are filled with
cups. Grain in the fields, straw men
talking with the wind.
Have you come far, water-
borne, wind-born? Here are
hounds-tongue and mistletoc oak.
When the spears bend as
you walk through vervain or broom,
call out to the brook-
it will swell in your veins as
you move through broom and vervain.
Have you spoken aloud? Here,
where the swallows' crewel-work
sews the sky with mist?
You must cut the filament.
You must be the lone spider.
CHOKA
WAKA
（3-7,3-7.7）
TANKA
（5-7-5.7-7）
—1. T.
Other Western forms of the debate are the BRaG Of BoAsT, in which two
speakers try to outdo each other in outrageous claims about their own
greatness, and the Scottish FLyIng, in which two poets attempt to
demolish each other with insults and invective.
Genethliacum
An occasional poem written in honor of a birth; see ode.
Georgics
see DIDACTICS.
Geste
A story in verse; see ROMANCE.
Glose
Spanish and Portuguese. Usually accentual-syllabic. Can be written in
any prosody or line-length, though each line is usually of a single
length. "Glose" means gloss, a "commentary" upon something; in this
case, upon quoted lines that

Page 157
appear as a headnote or epigraph at the beginning of the poem. This
epigraph is called the texte; each line of the texte becomes a repeton, a
refrain that appears just one other time in the body of the poem. The
first line of the texte finishes stanza one, the second line, stanza two,
and so on until the texte is exhausted and the poem comes to an end.
Here is a diagram of a glose written on a two-line texte in quatrain
Stanzas:
lines rhymes and repetons
1.
$ I texte
3. c
4. a
5. c
6. A
7. d
8. b
9. d
10. B
The following poem is a DouBle cLosethat is, each texte line is used
twice. It is written in the form of a STAvE:
Western Wind
Western wind, when wilt thou blow,
That the small rain down shall rain?

Christ! that my love were in my arms,
And I in my bed again.
ANONYMOUS
Western wind, when wilt thou blow?
When shall the rivers begin to flow
Over this ice toward the sea?
When will the branches of the tree
Drop their mantles of rime and snow?
Western wind, when wilt thou blow,
That the small rain down shall rain?
Then may the willows in their train
Loosen their limbs upon the stream;
Then may birdsong burst this dream
Of winter to seek the sprouting grain,
That the small rain down shall rain.

Page 150
Christ! that my love were in my arms
Where the grass greens and the bee swarms!
She is fair as the mountain heather,
Comely and kind as Maytime's weather
Over the land after April storms
Christ! that my love were in my arms,
And I in my bed again
Where gladly I have slept and lain
Upon the pillow of her hair.
When shall I once more come there,
Her breast beneath the counterpane,
And I in my bed again?
WESLI COURT
For another glose, see "Simon Judson" in Strong Measures (op. cit.).
Gwawdodyns (gwow-dód-in)
Gwawdodyn, a syllabic Welsh form, is a QuATRAIN stanzA with lines of
nine, nine, ten, and nine (9-9-10-9) syllables, respectively. The first,
second, and fourth lines end-rhyme with one another. The third line
may rhyme internally with itself, or there may be a syllable before the
end of the line that rhymes into line four.
Here are two possible stanza schemes:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. xxxxxx×ха
2. xxxxxXXXa
3.xxxxbxxxx
b

4. XXXXXXxxa
The second method, which is looser, might be plotted this way:
1.xxxxxxxxа
2.xxxXxxxxa
3.xxxxxxbxx
4.xxxbxxxxa

Page 159
The GWAWDONYN HIR (gwow-dód-in heer) is similar except that a rhyming
quatrain, each line of which contains nine syllables, is substituted for
the opening couplet. Thus, instead of two lines rhyming aa, there are
four lines rhyming aaaa beginning the stanza, which then becomes a
SESTET.
Haikai No Renga
see the RENGA in the section on the TANKA.
Haiku
The haiku is a Japanese tercet. Its lines consist of five, seven, and five
syllables, respectively. It is generally unrhymed:
linessyllables
1. xxxxx
2. xXXXXX
3. xxxXX
The word Hokku is Chinese in origin, and in Japanese poetry it came to
specify the first triplet of a RENGA CHAIN. This first verse set the theme of
the chain and was the most important part of the poem, the rest
ringing changes upon and elaborating the hokku. The hokku of a
renga chain ended with a full stopit was complete in and of itself.
A distinction has been made between the senryu and the haiku, though
both have exactly the same external form. The senryu is "An inquiry
into the nature of Man"; the haiku, "An inquiry into the nature of the
Universe."

By various stages the term haiku came to denote an independent tercet
of 5-7-5 syllables. Based originally on the kataura, and later derived
from both the renga and the tanka, the haiku dropped all glosses,
comments, or elaborations. It became a poem based on image,
emotive utterance, and certain other characteristics as well: spareness,
condensation, spontaneity and ellipsis, plus a seasonal elementthey are
about spring, summer, fall, or winter. Ideally, the haiku, though
complete in itself, is open-ended in that its statement reverberates
beyond the poem into overtone.

Page 160
The haiku is philosophically an outgrowth of Zen Buddhism. Haiku
translated into English tend to appear, to Western eyes, overly
sentimental and to fall victim to the pathetic fallacyoverstated
personification. We do not understand that the Zen poet is trying to
put himself or herself into the place of the thing perceived,
empathizing with the inanimate object. Moreover, the Zen poet is
trying to become one with the object and thus with all things.
The haiku has perhaps best been described as "A moment of intense
perception." William Carlos Williams enunciated the American-
British imagist doctrine as "No ideas but in things." Both conceptions
are, if not identical, at least quite similar, for both are based upon the
sensory level. Williams' dictum and T. S. Eliot's "objective
correlative" sever the observer from the perceived object, while at the
same time preserving much of the effect of Zen empathy. An objective
correlative is simply the vehicle of a metaphor. The theory is that, if
the correct object that correlates with the idea to be expressed
(symbolizes that idea) is chosen, then the idea will arise through
connotation and overtone without being stated denotatively. It is
through this objectivity, finally, that the poet in English achieves
empathywhich is only a way of saying there is no such thing as pure
objectivity. Here are fourteen English versions of Japanese haiku:
Fourteen Haiku
Will it soon be spring?
They lay the ground-work for it,
the plum tree and moon.
One sees in the glass
mere glass, not quicksilver, not
spring in the plum tree.
On the mountain path

Page 161
The hollyhocks turn
to follow the sun's footpath
through the rains of May.
The winds blow cherry
petals from all four quarters
to the lake's currents.
I would lie down drunk
on a bed of stone covered
with soft pinks blooming.
Bush-clover spills not
one drop of white dew, although
its waves never still.
The bell's chiming fades;
scent blossoms from the echo
of evening shadow.
The lightning flickers;
still darkness follows the voice
of the night-heron.
Please come to visit,
for I am lonely. One leaf
falls from the kiri.
The wind of autumn
is sharp in the chestnut tree,
yet its burrs are green.
Leaning on their canes
a snow-haired family comes
to visit the graves.
Grave, shake you as well
as my quaking voice in this
chill wind of the fall.

Page 162
The following poem is an example of the senyu; it is a cento on lines
from Emily Dickinson's letters.
An Amherst Haiku
Will you bring me a
jacinth for every finger,
and an onyx shoe?
For a poem that traces some of the development of Japanese poetry to
the haiku, see "Paradigm" in the section on FoRENsIcs. See the UTTERANCE,
the mondo and the two forms of KATAurA in the same section; for related
forms see also TANKA and RENGA.
Hendecasyllabics
Greek. Quantitative accentual syllabics. A pentameter line of eleven
syllables. Strictly, it is made up, in this order, of a trochee or spondee,
a dactyl, and three trochees or two trochees and a spondee:
fine
meteps
I.
XX XXX xx xx xx
Or:
2.
xxxxxxxxxx*
For an example of hendecasyllabics, see the second half of Tennyson's
"Milton" in the section on ALCAICS.
Heroic Couplet
see HEROICS.
Heroics
English or Greek. Accentual-syllabic. The ENGLISH HEROICLINE is iambic
pentameter blank verse. A distich in this meter, is called a HEROIC COUPLET.
If the stanza is a quatrain in this meter, it is called the HEROIC STANZA, Set

Page 163
the ITALIAN and the SIcILIAN QuAtrAIn. The Italian and Sicilian octaves and
OTTAVA RIMA Are HEROIC OCTAVES.
The CLASSICAL HEROIC LINE iS the hexameter (see ELEGIAcs). Verses composed
in either of these meters are called HEROIC VERSE. Traditionally, the
greatest heroic form is the EpIc (see NARRaTIves), a poem of great length
dealing with matters of large import and grand proportion.
Because the most famous poems written in heroic couplets are too
long to fit into this volume, only a sample of a lesser known poem is
given here, and the reader is referred to the works of Alexander Pope,
the most famous practitioner of the form, John Dryden, and others.
Description of an Author's Bedchamber
Where the Red Lion, staring o'er the way,
Invites each passing stranger that can pay;
Where Calvert's butt, and Parsons' black champagne,
Regale the drabs and bloods of Drury Lane;
There in a lonely room, from bailiffs snug,
The Muse found Scroggen stretched beneath a rug.
A window, patched with paper, lent a ray
That dimly showed the state in which he lay;
The sanded floor that grits beneath the tread,
The humid wall with paltry pictures spread;
The royal game of goose was there in view,
And the Twelve Rules the royal martyr drew;
The Seasons, framed with listing, found a place,
And brave Prince William showed his lampblack face.
The morn was cold; he views with keen desire
The rusty grate unconscious of a fire:
With beer and milk arrears the frieze was scored,
And five cracked teacups dressed the chimney board;
A nightcap decked his brows instead of bay,
A cap by nighta stocking all the day.

Idyl
see BUCOLICS.
Incantation
see LITURGICS.
In Memoriam Stanza
see ENVELOPE STANZA.
Interlude
A short play, often satiric or comic in nature, performed between the
acts of a longer play, usually a tragedy. A PLamPede is a satiric interlude
performed between the acts of a comedy.
Irregular Ode
see ODE.
Italian Octave
see OCTAVE.
Italian Sestet, Italian Sonnet
see SONNET.
Katauta
see FORENSICS.
Keastsian Ode
see ENGLISH ODE.

Page 165
Kyrielle
French. Syllabic. A poem written in quatraIn stanzas. Each line has a
count of eight syllables. The last line of the first quatrain is the refrain,
and it reappears as the last line of each quatrain. Usually it is rhymed.
The poem can have any number of stanzas:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1.xxxxxxxа
2.xXXXXXXb
3.xxxxxxxа
4. XXXXXXX
Brefrain
5.XXXXXXXС
6. xXXXXXXb
7.XXXXXXXC
8. XXXXXXX
Brefrain
For an example of a kyrielle, see Theodore Roethke's "Dirty Dinky" in
Strong Measures (op. cit.).
Lai
A French form or stanza pattern. Syllabic. A poem or sTaNza of nine
lines turning on two rhymes: aabaabaab. The a lines are five syllables
long; the b lines are two syllables long.

In a poem consisting of more than one stanza, the following stanzas
have their own rhymes. A diagram for one stanza is thus:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. xxxxa
2. xxxxa
3. xb
4. xxxxa
5. xxxxa
6. xb
7. xxxxa
0. xxxx
9. xb
The LAINoUveau, also French and syllabic, is a development of the lai.
More complicated than the lai, the opening a lines of the lai nouveau
form a refrain for later stanzas, while

Page 166
alternating (as in the vilLaneLLe). The A1 line closes stanza two, A2
closes stanza three, and so on to the last stanza, where they are united
in a couplet in reverse order to close the poem: A2A1. Though the
main rhyme is usually carried from stanza to stanza, sometimes the
short-line rhymes vary from stanza to stanza.
It should be noted that the two-syllable, rhyming lines are extremely
difficult to do in English. The schematic for a strict poem consisting
of two, eight-line stanzas can be plotted thus:
lines
syllables,
rhymes,
refrains
XXXX
Alrefrain
2. xXXX
Azrefrain
3. xb
4. xxxxa
5. xxxxa
6. xb
7. xxxxa
8. xxxxa
9. xxxxa
10. xxxx
11. x c

12.xxxxa
13. xxxxa
14. x C
15. xxxx A2
16. xXXX A1
The virelai, like its sister forms, is a syllabic French stanza pattern. Its
syllabic count is the same as the lai, and it has, as a rule, nine lines to
the stanza, as does the lai. The difference is that the long lines of a
following stanza pick up the short-line rhymes of the preceding
stanza. This interlocking can be carried on indefinitely until the final
stanza picks up as its short-line rhyme the long-line rhyme of the first
stanza. For other interlocking forms, see the RUBAIYAT and TERZA RIMA.
Lamnet
see LYRICS.
Lay
see LYRICS.
Limerick
French. Originally syllabic but, in English, quantitative accentual-
syllabics. A single quinter, rhyming aabba and written in iambic and
anapestic measures. Lines one (1), two

Page 167
(2), and five (5) have an iamb and two anapests, in that order; lines
three (3) and four (4) have either an iamb and an anapest or two
anapests. Line five (5) can be merely a modified repetition of line one
(1). Most of the best limericks are anonymous and scurrilous, in fact,
pornographic. Here is the schematic:
lines
1.
2.
3.
4.
meters and rhymes
xxxxx xxa or A
xx xxx xxá
xx xxb
xx xxb
xx xxx xxá or A
Old Man with a Beard
There was an Old Man with a beard
Who said,
, "It is just as I feared!
Two Owls and a Hen,
Four Larks and a Wren,
Have all built their nests in my beard!"
EDWARD LEAR
The French ancestry of the limerick has been disputed. Some
authorities feel it is a native English form, descended from the MADSONG
STANZA, which in turn is traced from the main stanza pattern of the
medieval "The Cuckoo Song," given here in a modern version:
The Cuckoo Song
Sing cuckoo now! Sing cuckoo!
Sing cuckoo! Sing cuckoo now!
Summer is a-coming in,
Loudly sing cuckoo!
It grows the seed
And blows the mead,
And springs the wood anew

Page 168
Sing cuckoo!
The ewe bleats after the lamb,
And after the calf, the cow;
The bullock starts,
The buck farts
Merry sing cuckoo!
Cuckoo, cuckoo!
Well sing ye, cuckoo,
Nor cease ye never, now!
ANONYMOUS
However, the French background of this form is probably not
disputable, because it is clearly a podic form, and podics, as we have
seen in the chapter on the sonic level, developed after Chaucer
adapted French syllabic verse to English accentual verse and adopted
Norman rhyming.
The rhyme scheme of madsong stanza is that of "The Cuckoo Song"
main stanza, a3b3c2c2b3, and, like it, the meters are podic. Often the
lines consonate rather than rhyme. The long lines often end in an extra
unaccented syllable (falling endings). Here is the schematic of the first
stanza of "Tom O'Bedlam's Song," which follows:
lines
stresses and rhymes
I.
xxxxxxxa
2.
xxxxxxb
3
xxxxx*
4.
xxxxc
5.
*xxxxxx
The madsong itself, aside from the stanza pattern (and again like "The
Cuckoo Song"), is a lyric sung by a fool or a madman:

Page 169
Tom O'Bedlam's Song
From the hag and hungry goblin
That into rags would rend ye,
All the spirits that stand
By the naked man
In the book of moons defend ye!
I slept not since the Conquest;
Till then I never wakéd
Till the roguish boy
Of love, where Ilay,
Me found, and stripped me naked.
The moon's my constant mistress,
And the lonely owl my marrow;
The flaming drake,
And the night-crow, make
Me music, to my sorrow.
I know more than Apollo,
For, oft when he lies sleeping,
I behold the stars
At mortal wars,
And the rounded welkin weeping.
The moon embraces her shepherd,
And the queen of love her warrior;
While the first doth horn
The stars of morn,
And the next the heavenly farrier.
With a host of furious fancies
Whereof I am commander;
With a burning spear,
And a horse of air,
To the wilderness I wander.

Page 170
For a modern madsong in madsong stanza, see Wesli Court's "Odds
Bodkin's Springsong" in Poetry: An Introduction (op. cit.). Not all
madsongs, however, are written in this stanza patternsee Yeats' "Crazy
Jane and the Bishop" in the same book (where it is analyzed).
Despite the popularity of the limerick in the twentieth century, the
older folk tradition of the madsong can still be found in current use.
Here is a children's game song that was current at least as late as the
1940s:
Street Song
Help! Murder! Police!
My mother fell in the grease!
I laughed so hard
I fell in the lard
Help! Murder! Police!
ANONYMOUS
Many experiments have been enacted with the limerick form. Among
other things, it has been used with some success as a stanza pattern
rather than as a poem form. Changing its hard and wrenched rhymes
to consonances, however, produces strange results:
A Robbery
Some thieves sacked the home of Miss Hughes
Who owned a remarkable nose.
She cried, "Sirs! I shall sneeze
And alert the police
If you don't get out of my house!"
ANONYMOUS
But the form has settled down into, at its mildest, salacious
suggestiveness
Hornblower

Page 171
In the midst of a riff
One day he got stiff
When he grabbed, not his foot, but his crock.
ANONYMOUS
and, at its worst, its worst:
A Butcher
There once was a butcher named Sims
Who married a woman of whims.
She said "No!" once too often,
So he bought her a coffin
And made farewell love to her limbs.
ANONYMOUS
Litany
see LITURGICS.
Literary Ballad
see BALLAD.
Literary Epitaph
see EPITAPH.
Liturgics
Liturgics is the minor subgenre of poetry based on the forms of public
worship in the Christian church. These forms range from prayer to
sermon, and they include even such things as curses. The spectrum is
too broad to do much more than give examples of a few of the forms;
but examples of others will be found elsewhere in this book.
The anTIpHon is a dialogue between choirs, one choir singing the
versicle, the other singing the response:

"Canst Thou Draw?"
Job XLI: 17
Canst thou draw out Leviathan with an hook, or his tongue
with a cord which thou lettest down? Canst thou put an
hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn?
Vain attempt!
Will he make many supplications unto thee?
Terrible words!
Will he make a covenant with thee?

Page 172
Distressing covenant!
Or, wilt thou take him for a servant forever?
Dreadful servant!
Wilt thou play with him, as with a bird?
Dismal play!
Or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?
Strong cord!
Shall thy companions make a banquet of him?
Mournful banquet!
Shall they part him among the merchants?
Deadly shares!
Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons?
Hopeless attempt!
Or his head with fish spears?
Despairing thought!
MANOAH BODMAN
A caNTIcLe is a scriptural hymn for public worship. A litany is a public
prayer of penitence led by the clergyman and responded to by the
congregation:
His Litany, to the Holy Spirit
In the hour of my distress,
When temptation me oppress,
And when I my sins confess,
Sweet Spirit comfort me!
When I lie within my bed,
Sick in heart, and sick in head,
And with doubts discomforted,
Sweet Spirit comfort me!
When the house doth sigh and weep,
And the world is drowned in sleep,
Yet mine eyes the watch do keep;
Sweet Spirit comfort me!

Page 173
When his potion and his pill
His, or none, or little skill
Meet for nothing but to kill,
Sweet Spirit comfort me!
When the passing bell doth toll
And the Furies in a shoal
Come to fright a parting soul,
Sweet Spirit comfort me!
When the tapers now burn blue
And the comforters are few,
And that number more, than true,
Sweet Spirit comfort me!
When the priest his last hath prayed,
And I nod to what is said
Because my speech is now decayed,
Sweet Spirit comfort me!
When (God knows) I'm tossed about,
Either with despair or doubt,
Yet before the glass be out,
Sweet Spirit comfort me!
When the Tempter me pursueth
With the sins of all my youth
And half damns me with untruth,
Sweet Spirit comfort me!
When the flames and hellish cries
Fright mine ears and fright mine eyes,
And all terrors me surprise,
Sweet Spirit comfort me!
When the Judgement is revealed,
And that opened which was sealed,
When to Thee I have appealed,

Page 174
Warning to Travelers Seeking Accommodations at
Mr. de Ville's Inn
May all that dread the cruel fiend of night
Keep on, and not at this cursed mansion light.
'Tis Hell; 'tis Hell! and De Villes here do dwell:
Here dwells the Devilsurely this's Hell.
Nothing but wants: a drop to cool your tongue
Can't be procured these cruel fiends among.
Plenty of horrid fiends among!
Plenty of horrid grins and looks severe,
Hunger and thirst, but pity's banished here
The right hand keep, if Hell on Earth you fear!
SARAH KEMBLE KNIGHT
A PRAYER is sometimes not much different from a curse:
Resentments Composed because of the Clamor
of Town Topers Outside My Apartment
I ask thy aid, O potent Rum!
To charm these wrangling topers dumb.
Thou hast their giddy brains possessed
The man confounded with the beast
And I, poor 1, can get no rest.
Intoxicate them with thy fumes:
O still their tongues till morning comes!
SARAH KEMBLE KNIGHT
INCaNTations are charms, spells, conjurations, and so forththe apparatus
of sympathetic magic. Other forms are associated with incantations,
such as ACROSTICS, ANAGRAMS, and RUNES. The BLessIng is a form of incantation:
A House Blessing
Saint Francis and Saint Benedight,
Bless this house from wicked wight,

Page 175
Keep it from all evil spirits,
Fairies, weasels, rats, and ferrets,
From curfew time
To the next Prime.
WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT
A CHANt is a religious recitative that has a refrain:
The Mystery
I am the breeze breathed at sea,
I am the wave woven of ocean,
1 am the sott sound of spume,
I am the bull of the seven battles,
I am the cormorant upon the cliff,
I am the spear of the sun striking,
I am the rose of the fairest rose.
I am the wild bull of war,
I am the salmon stroking the flood,
I am the mere upon the moor,
I am the rune of rare lore,
I am the tooth of the long lance,
I am He who fired the head.
Who emblazons the mountain-meeting?
Who heralds the moon's marches?
Who leads the sun to its lair?
I am the Word, I am the Eye.
AMERGIN
A cARoL originally was merely a joyous hymn, but the term has come
by tradition to apply specifically to hymns about the Nativity, whether
joyous or not. See cARoL sTaNzA for a strict stanza form.
Long Hymnal Octave, Long Hymnal Stanza, Long Measure, Long
Octave

Page 176
Lyrics
A major subgenre of poetry, lyrics are songs. Lyrics are specific to the
genre, whereas the other two major subgenres, narratives and
dramatics, are not. There are many kinds of songs. In this section I
will name some of them, but there are many other lyric forms listed
throughout this volume.
The ALBA Of AUBADE is a love song whose setting is dawn. Sometimes
each stanza ends with the word "dawn." John Donne's "The Sun
Rising," treated earlier in these pages, is an aubade. A related form is
the REVEILLE:
An Hymn to the Morning
Attend my lays, ye ever honored nine,
Assist my labours, and my strains refine;
In smoothest numbers pour the notes along,
For bright Aurora now demands my song.
Aurora, hail, and all the thousand dyes,
Which deck thy progress through the vaulted skies;
The morn awakes, and wide extends her rays,
On every leaf the gentle zephyr plays;
Harmonious lays the feathered race resume,
Dart the bright eye, and shake the painted plume.
Ye shady groves, your verdant gloom display
To shield your poet from the burning day:
Calliope, awake the sacred lyre,
While thy fair sisters fan the pleasing fire:
The bowers, the gales, the variegated skies
In all their pleasures in my bosom rise.
See in the east the illustrious king of day!
His rising radiance drives the shades away
But oh! I feel his fervid leaves too strong,
And scarce begun, concludes the abortive song.

Page 177
Then to love I do incline,
When I drink my wanton wine;
And I wish all maidens mine,
When I drink my sprightly wine:
Well I sup, and well I dine,
When I drink my frolic wine
But I languish, lour and pine,
When I want my fragrant wine.
ROBERT HERRICK
See also the couplet for a discussion of this form.
The BaLAdA is a dance song with an insistent refrain. A CACCIA OF CATCH is a
longer roundelayany simple lyric that utilizes a refrain:
The Isle Is Full of Noises
What if, tomorrow, after your coffee,
after your Wheaties, while you're buttoning your clothes
a dove descends and inspects your chimney?
(What if it doesn't?)
Expect nothing. Suppose.
What if, while putting your room in order,
after you've stashed every thing where it goes
you see that your mirror's haloed in foxfire?
(What if it isn't?)
Expect nothing. Suppose.
What if, during your smoke on the parkbench,
after your cogitations, before your doze
who should kiss you but a leftover virgin?
(What if she doesn't?)
Expect nothing. Suppose.
What if, suddenly, deep in a bookstore,
a ghost voice comes leap-frogging over the rows
the voice says, "I love you. " It's your father's.

Page 178
the salt of your tears withers the sproutlings
What if it doesn't?
Suppose. Suppose. Suppose.
SAM HUDSON
The CANSO, CANZO, OI CANZoNE is a song about beauty and love, for example,
"To His Coy Mistress" by Andrew Marvell.
A chantey is a work song, particularly a work song sung by sailors. See
"Hornpipepithalamium" later in this section. The DHYRaMB is a wild
song honoring revelry:
Jolly Rutterkin
Rutterkin has come to town
Hey! jolly rutter, hey!
Without a cloak nor coat nor gown,
But a good green hood upon his crown
Like a hoyden rutter!
Rutterkin has no English
Hey! jolly rutter, hey!
His tongue runs on like butterfish
Smeared with grease upon his dish
Like a hoyden rutter!
Kiss Rutterkin and change your luck
Hey! jolly rutter, hey!
He takes his ale down at a suck
Till he be wiser than a duck
Like a hoyden rutter!
When Rutterkin gets up from board
Hey! jolly rutter, hey!
He'll piss a gallon in a gourd,
Then take the lasses like a lord,
Like a hoyden Rutter!

Page 179
ALsiS a serious lyric meditation, often on the subject of death; see
William Cullen Bryant's "Thanatopsis" and the section on ELEGIACS.
Other, more intense lyrics of lamentation (see the LAMeNT) are the
CORONACH, DIRGE, MONODY, and THRENODY:
A Lie-Awake Dirge
This very night, this very night,
Every night and all,
Fire and sleet and candle-light,
And Christ receive your soul.
When you from hence away are passed,
Every night and all,
To Stony Moor you come at last,
And Christ receive your soul.
If ever you gave hose and shoes,
Every night and all,
Sit ye down, put them to use,
And Christ receive your soul.
If hose and shoes you gave to none,
Every night and all,
The winds shall prick you to the bare bone,
And Christ receive your soul.
When from the Bridge of Dread you pass,
Every night and all,
To Purgatory's fire you come at last,
And Christ receive your soul.
If ever you gave meat or drink,
Every night and all,
The fire shall never make you shrink,
And Christ receive your soul.
If meat or drink you gave to none,

Page 180
This very night, this very night,
Every night and all,
Fire and sleet and candle-light,
And Christ receive your soul.
ANONYMOUS
The EPITHALAMION OF EPITHALAMIUM iS a marital elegy or wedding song, a form
Of OCCASIONALs. Originally it was written in three movements or strophes.
The first part was to be sung at the chamber door of the bridegroom
and bride. It was congratulatory in natureit urged the newlyweds to
lusty combat and was designed to muffle the sounds of that encounter.
The second strophe was intended to refresh the combatants and urge
them to fresh efforts during the night. The third movement, sung in
the morning, congratulated the couple on their performances, urged a
truce until the next evening, and instructed them in their domestic and
marital duties. A meditative lyric on the same subject is called a
PROTHALAMION OF PROTHALAMIUM.
Hornpipepithalamium
The sea blows high and the wind blows cold,
The Hornet sails out to sting.
We bellbottom boys are bully and bold,
Young at the moment but growing old,
And it's no damn good that I bought Jean a ring,
I bought pretty Jean a ring.
The Gunner's Apprentice is cute as a pin,
The Yeoman can really swing.
Those almond-eyed girls all know how to sin
To make your eyes swivel and your head spin
But I had to go buy Jeannie a ring,
A yellowish diamond ring.
Davy Jones flirts with the mermaids below.
Down there where Neptune is king

Page 181
While the drowned sailors gather around in a ring
And dance till the fathoms ring,
For each wooed a maiden of iron and steel,
Then took her out for a fling.
She had a pert hull and a lovely keel,
But one day she just wouldn't answer her wheel
I wonder if Jeannie's still wearing her ring,
That beautiful bargain ring.
The wind blows cold, the sea blows high;
I stand here trying to sing,
But the salt spray rises to spit in my eye
Till I'm ready to kill and fit to die
While Jeannie sits home and stares at her ring,
For I gave sweet Jean my ring.
WESLI COURT
The LaMeNT is a song of complaint.
Three Mourning Songs and an Oath
Merry it is while summer lasts
With wildfowls' song;
But now there nears the windy blast
And weather strong.
O! O! but this night is long!
And I, weighed down with heavy wrong,
Sorrow and sigh and fast.
Fowls in the firth,
The fishes in the flood
And I may wax mad!
Much sorrow I walk with,
For I am of bone and blood.

Page 182
And with pain;
With wind we bloom,
With wind we decrease,
With weeping we come,
With weeping we pass.
With pain we begin,
With pain we end,
With dread we dwell,
With dread we wend.
iv.
I've been a forester many a long day;
My locks are white with hoar.
I'll hang up my horn by the green wood spray
Forester I will be no more.
The while that I may my bow bend
I shall wed no wife.
I shall build me a bower at the wood's end,
And there I will lead my life.
ANONYMOUS
The BLuEs is a modern form of complaintsee BLUES STANZA.
The Lay is a short narrative songnot to be confused with the French LAL,
which is a set form. An example would be "La Belle Dame Sans
Merci" by John Keats.
The MADRIGaL is a lyric concerning love, meant to be sung.
Mulidor's Madrigal
Dildido, dildido,
O love, O love,
I feel thy rage rumble below and above!
In summer time I saw a face,
Trop belle pour moi, helas, helas!

Page 183
Thy beauty, my love, exceedeth supposes;
Thy hair is a nettle for the nicest roses.
Mon Dieu, aide moi!
That I with the primrose of my fresh wit
May tumble her tyranny under my feet:
He! donc je serai un jeune roi.
Trop belle pour moi, helas, helas!
Trop belle pour moi, voila mon trepas.
ROBERT GREENE
There are two strict forms of the madrigal listed under its own
heading. The madsong, too, is listed separately under MADSONG STANZA.
NoNsENSE vErsE is what the name implies. "Jabberwocky" by Lewis
Carroll is a MOCK BALLADSee SATIRICS.
A NURSERY RHYME is a song for children(?):
The Lady and the Swine
There was a lady loved a swine,
"Honey!" said she;
"Pig-hog, wilt thou be mine?"
Hunc, said he.
"I'll build thee a silver sty,
Honey," said she;
"And in it thou shalt lie."
Hunc, said he.
"Pinned with a silver pin,
Honey," said she;
"That thou may'st go out and in."
Hunc, said he.
"Wilt thou have me now,
Honey?" said she;
"Speak, or my heart will break!"

Page 184
EGY. The PaEaN is a song of praise to the gods; a PANEGyRIc Of ENCOMIUM
praises men The pastoraL and similar forms are treated in the section on
BucoLIcs. For the revelLe, look in this section under ALBA and AUBADE. For
the RIDDLE, See DIDAcTIcs. The ROMANCE (OF METRICAL ROMaNcE, to distinguish it
from prose) is a verse tale whose subject matter concerns chivalry or
honor.
A roundelay is any simple lyric that utilizes a refrain. A set form was
invented by John Dryden, and it is to be found listed separately. See
also the French ROUNDELET.
Song from Aella
O! sing unto my roundelay;
O! drop the briny tear with me;
Dance no more at holiday;
Like a running river be.
My love is dead,
Gone to his death-bed
All under the willow tree.
Black his hair as the winter night,
White his skin as the summer snow,
Red his face as the morning light;
Cold he lies in the grave below.
My love is dead,
Gone to his death-bed
All under the willow tree.
Sweet his tongue as the throstle's note,
Quick in dance as thought can be,
Deft his tabor, cudgel stout;
O! he lies by the willow-tree.
My love is dead,
Gone to his death-bed
All under the willow tree.

Page 185
My love is dead,
Gone to his death-bed
All under the willow tree.
Come, with acorn-cup and thorn,
Drain my own heart's blood away;
Life and all its good I scorn,
Dance by night, or feast by day.
My love is dead,
Gone to his death-bed
All under the willow tree.
THOMAS CHATTERTON
A RUNE is an Anglo-Saxon INCANTATIONSee "The Mystery" by Amergin.
Finally, coming full circle, the serenade is like the aubade, except that
its setting is the evening. "She Walks in Beauty" by George Gordon,
Lord Byron, is a standard example.
Madrigal
Italian and English. The Italian madrigal is written in lines of either
seven or eleven syllables and is comprised of two or three triplets,
followed by one or two rhyming couplets. There is no set rhyme
scheme for the triplets, but if the poem were written in TERZA RIMA it
might look like this:
lines rhymes
1. a
2. b
3. a
4. b
5. c

6. b
7. C
8. d
9. C
10. d
11. d
12. a
13. a
The strict English madrigal was an accentual-syllabic invention of
Geoffrey Chaucer. Written in iambic pentameter measures, it is
comprised of three stanzas, the first of which is a triplet. All the lines
of this triplet, which is used as though it were a texte, are refrains. The
second stanza is a QuAtRAIn. Lines six (6) and seven (7) of the poem
(three and four of the quatrain) are lines one (1) and two (2) of the
trip-

Page 186
let repeated. The third stanza is a sester, the last three lines of which
are the first triplet repeated. The rhyme scheme of the poem is AB1
B2abAB1 abbAB1 B2, which is easier to see in a schematic diagram:
rhymes,
lines refrains
1. Arefrain
2. Birefrain
3. Brefrain
4. a
5. b
6. Arefrain
7. Birefrain
8. a
9. b
10. b
11. Arefrain
12. Birefrain
13. Bzrefrain
Chaucer wrote, in "Merciless Beauty," a series of three such
madrigals:
Merciless Beauty

i. Captivity
Your two eyes will slay me suddenly
The beauty of them I may not sustain,
They pierce and wound my heart with blade so keen.
Only your word will bind up instantly
My heart's hurt while still the wound is green;
Your two eyes will slay me suddenly
The beauty of them I may not sustain.
Upon my troth, I tell you faithfully
That of my life and death you are the queen,
For with my death the truth shall soon be seen
Your two eyes will slay me suddenly
The beauty of them I may not sustain,
They pierce and wound my heart with blade so keen.
il. Rejection
Your beauty has from your heart so chased
Pity, it is useless to complain,
For Danger winds your mercy in his chain.
Though I am guiltless, my death you have purchased
I tell you true, I do not need to feign;

Page 187
Your beauty has from your heart so chased
Pity, it is useless to complain.
Alas! that nature has in you compassed
Such great beauty, no man may attain
To mercy, though he starve because of pain.
Your beauty has from your heart so chased
Pity, it is useless to complain,
For Danger winds your mercy in his chain.
iii. Escape
Since I from Love have thus escaped so fat,
I never plan to be back in prison lean;
Since I am free, Love isn't worth a bean.
He may reply, answer this or that
I snap my fingers, speak just what I mean.
Since I from Love have thus escaped so fat,
I never plan to be back in prison lean.
Love has struck my name clear off his slate,
And from my ledger he is stricken clean
Forevermorethere is no in-between.
Since I from Love have thus escaped so fat,
I never plan to be back in prison lean.
Since I am free, Love isn't worth a bean.
GEOFFREY CHAUCER
For freer forms, see the section concerning LYRICS.
Madsong, Madsong Stanza
see LIMERICK, LYRICS.
Mask, Masque
see DRAMATICS.
Miracle Play

see DRAMATICS.
Mondo
see FORENSICS, KATAUTA.
Mnok's Tale Stanza
see HUITAIN.
Monody
An ElEcy for the dead delivered by a single person.
Monologue
see DRAMATICS.

Page 180
Morality Play
see DRAMATICS.
Morningsong
A formal lyric prayer to be sung at dawn. See LITURGICS.
Mote
Spanish. A mote is any poem of one or two lines, containing a
complete statement or thought. The mote can serve as a texte to be
glossed in verse, as in the GLose.
There are any number of set, single-line forms that might serve as
motes, including the ALEXANDRINE, SEPTENARY, and the CLASSICAL HEROIC LINE. See
also the COUPLET.
Motto
see MOTE, POSIE.
Mystery Play
see DRAMATICS.
Narratives
Narratives is one of the three major subgenres of poetry. The four
basic elements of narration are character, plot, atmosphere, and
theme.
Theme is the thread of ideas that underlies the story. All narrative
elements support the theme, which must be distinguished from the
subject. The subject of a narrative can be expressed in a word or
phrase, but the theme is always expressible only in a complete
sentence (see DIDACTICS).

Character has to do with the personal characteristics of the persons in
the narrative. These personal characteristics determine the actions and
reactions of the persons in the story. The only person absolutely
necessary is the protagonist (the main character). A narrative can have
a multiple protagonist (a group or village, for instance), though
normally one person will represent such a composite protagonist. A
protagonist has two qualities: a desireto be, to do, or to have
somethingand a dominant personality trait, such as courage,
generosity, or fervor. The protagonist's desire drives her

Page 189
or him toward an objective or goal. Attainment of the goal will be
blocked by a logical antagonist. The antagonist can be another person
in opposition, a situation (being lost in a blizzard), a force (society), or
oneself (an inner conflict). The opposition of protagonist versus
antagonist leads to conflict, which is essential to the dramatic
situation (to be distinguished from the dramatic viewpoint).
Plot concerns the actions and events that take place in the narrative
and the resolution of the conflict between protagonist and antagonist.
Just as theme is the thread of thought that binds all elements of the
narrative together, plot can be defined as the thread of actions and
events that carries the story and serves to exemplify the theme.
Atmosphere is the mood of the narrative, and mood is created by
means of setting (locale and surroundings in which the narrative takes
place), attitude (of the narrator and of the characters in the narrative),
and descriptions (the sensory level).
Structure of the Narrative. Narratives can emphasize any one of the
four basic elements or any combination of the four. Furthermore, the
author tells the story from a particular narrative viewpoint. In
reviewing this subject, I will break down narrative voice, covered
earlier, into subcategories:
A. Orientation.
1. In the author-oriented narrative viewpoint, the author narrates
the story.
2. In the character-oriented narrative viewpoint, a character in the
story narrates.
a. A major character (protagonist or antagonist).
b. A minor character.

Page 190
3. Finally, the story can be told in the third person singular (He,
she, it saw what happened) or plural (they saw what happened).
C. Angle.
1. From the single-angle, only the actions of one character are
followed; only what occurs in that character's presence is narrated.
2. From the multiple-angle (double, triple, etc.), what occurs in the
presence of two or more characters is narrated.
3. From the omnipresent angle, the narrator has access to actions
everywhere in the story.
D. Access.
1. The narrator might have only objective access to occurrences,
being able to narrate only actions seen or heard.
2. The narrator might have subjective access, being able to narrate
not only actions and words but the thoughts and emotions of
characters as well.
As with all other elements, the narrator can blend any combination of
orientation, person, access, and angle. The omniscient viewpoint is a
combination of author-oriented, third person, and omnipresent angle
narration with subjective access. In other words, the narrator knows
all about everything, internal and external, everywhere in the story
and narrates it thus.
Complication. The complication story emphasizes plot. A model
complication story is structured as follows:
Inciting moment. It begins at a crucial point in the narrative, often in
medias res, "in the middle of things"; that is, in the center of the main
action. Epics traditionally begin this way.

Exposition. The story then gives necessary background information
and provides partial answers to the questions, who or what? where?
when? and sometimes, why?
Body. The main part of the story is a series of rising actions, or
increasingly stronger attempts on the part of the protagonist to achieve
the goal. Each successive action culminates in a crisis, or critical
moment, when protagonist and antagonist are pitted against one
another. In each attempt, the protagonist either fails or only partially
succeeds.

Page 191
Climax. In time, the series of rising actions leads to an ultimate crisis,
when protagonist and antagonist are pitted against one another in a
final effort. At this point, the protagonist either overcomes the
antagonist and achieves the goal, or the conflict is lost. The black
moment is the point in the climax when things look darkest for the
chances of the protagonist.
Denouement. In the winding-down of the story, all actions are
resolved and the story is concluded.
Conclusion. The ending of the story is either open or closedeither all
loose ends are tied up neatly, or the story ends ambiguously; the
actions may have been resolved, but not necessarily the attitudes of
the narrator, the author, or the reader. Many modern narratives are
open-ended; they are inclusive. Traditional narratives are often closed;
they are exclusive.
Often a complication story will involve a subplot or secondary story
line that runs parallel to the main story lineparticularly in longer
narratives. The subplot, generally, involves secondary characters of
the narrative, and the actions of these characters serve to complicate
or impede the main action. Often the protagonist will have to deal
with the subplot's impediments before he or she can go on to deal with
the main conflict, hence the term "complication" for a narrative that
emphasizes plot and action.
Narrative Forms. There are a number of narrative poems, the chief of
which is the epic, a long heroic verse narrative. Another important long
form is the romancea long lyric verse narrative. The BaLLaD (which,
though often written in specific stanza forms, in fact has no particular
set form) is a relatively short lyric verse narrative. The FaBulav is a short
story in verse; the lay is a vignette in song form. An EPyLlIoN is a "little
epic,
," originally composed in dactylic hexameter verse. The BEAST EPIC

Page 192
A number of French poetic formssuch as from the BalLade family,
including the chant royaL (the longest of the forms)have been
traditionally used to tell stories, but in fact most poets choose nonce
forms, and stories have been told in every prosody. There are
examples of narrative poems throughout this volume.
Obviously, there is no room in a book such as this for examples of the
longest of the forms, but we might mention some of the better-known
works in English. The greatest English epic is generally conceded to
be John Milton's Paradise Lost. The longest and most unreadable is
Edmund Spenser's The Faery Queen, though this work is perhaps
more an interminable romance than an epic.
America's most successful epic is Stephen Vincent Benet's John
Brown's Body, which has long been overlooked as grand narrative.
Perhaps the reason for this oversight is that it is the world's most
readable epic, and moderns possibly suspect that the epic, as "high
art," ought not to be readable. Benet's poem, which is about the Civil
War, has been described as a "cinema epic" because the structure of
the poem is episodic, flashing from one part of the conflict to another.
Passages of adventure and action are mixed with exquisite lyric
interludes and songs, the camera eye of the narrator zooming in for a
closeup, then pulling back for long-range shots and exposition. The
poem lends itself well to dramatic rendition, and it was performed on
Broadway in 1953 in an adaptation by Charles Laughton. The
performance was a hit, and it was recorded by Columbia Records the
same year.
Critics have attempted to claim epical stature for Walt Whitman's
Song of Myself, but the poet had more insight, as the title tells us: it is
an egopoem, not a narrative one. To define such a work as an "epic" is
to distort the form and tradition of narrative art. The poem is the

Page 193
ther does it tell a story, not even the autobiography of the author; there
is thus nothing to support the interest of the reader.
Similarly, Ezra Pound's Cantos cannot be called an epic because it,
too, is largely confessional in nature. Furthermore, no one has been
able to identity a central character (other than the narrator), plot, or
theme that unifies the "actions" of the poem. Pound, too, was much
closer to the mark when he titled it as he did: the poem is a series of
cantos that lead nowhere specific. No resolution takes place, there is
no discernible beginning, middle, or end; therefore, it is a set, not even
a sequence, although one that contains some brilliant writing. The
work might better be thought of as the collected, later poems of Ezra
Pound.
William Carlos Williams' Paterson comes closer to the model of an
epic than Pound's Cantos, but it is even more episodic and jumpy than
Benet's John Brown's Body. Nevertheless, it is readable and in
partseven, perhaps, overallnarrative. An interestingtruly
interestingpoem built on the model of Williams' piece is Charlie
Davis' And So the Irish Built a Church. H. D. (Hilda Doolittle) wrote
a long narrative, Helen in Egypt, and Edwin Arlington Robinson
wrote several, but these are more on the order of novellas in verse
than of epics. Conrad Aiken, too, has written both long, beautifully
lyrical narrative poems and sequences of poems that function as
narration but do not try the short attention-spans of contemporary
readers.
Nasher
see SATIRICS.
Nightsong
A formal lyric prayer to be sung at midnight. See murgIcs.

Noh Play
see DRAMATICS.
Nonsense Verse
see LYRICS.
Nursery Rhyme
see LYRICS.

Page 194
Obsequy
A formal lyric mourning the dead; a funeral song. See EPICEDIUM, MONODY;
also, DIRGE, ELEGY, OCCASIONALS,
Occasionals
A minor subgenre of poetry. I have already spoken of the ode and the
ELEGY, the two major forms of occasionals, in the sections on ELEGIACS,
LYRIcS, and elsewhere.
Wordsworth's "Ode: On the Intimations of Immortality" is an IRREGULAR
oDE. Keats' "To Autumn" is an ENGLIsH ODE, his invention. Milton's "On
the Morning of Christ's Nativity" is a HoMostropHIc oDE; though it uses two
stanza forms, those in each of the two movements are alike. These
poems can be found in Poetry: An Introduction (op. cit.) and
elsewhere. The PINDArIc oDe is described in the section on the oDE.
There are various other kinds of occasional poems described
elsewhere in these pages, such as the EpITHALAMIoN or wedding
celebration, the PROTHALAMIoN, and so forth.
Octave
A STANza consisting of eight lines. It can be written in any meter,
rhymed or unrhymed. Lines can be of any length. Rhymes, if any, can
be random or regular.
The ITALIAN oCTAve is Written in iambic pentameter lines, and it rhymes
abbaabba (see the ITALIAN SONNET). The SICILIAN oCTavE is also accentual-
syllabic. It is a sTanza of iambic pentameter lines turning on two
rhymes. It can also be a complete poem. The diagram of the Sicilian
octave looks like this:

Page 195
Lines
meters and rhymes
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
xx xx xx xx xb
Xx x x xx xá
xXxX xX xx xb
xx xx xx xx xa
xx xx xx xx xb
The stramborto is a Sicilian octave in hendecasyllabic lines. For an
excellent octave poem, see James Wright's "Song for the Middle of
the Night" in Strong Measures (op. cit.). For closely related forms, see
OTTAVA RIMA, the Sicilian sester, and the second ending of the Italian SONNET.
See also the section on HEROICS.
Ode
There are three more or less strict forms of the ode. The first is the
PINDARIC ODE, which is of Greek origin. It is usually written in accentual-
syllabic verse. The stanza pattern, rhyme scheme, and line-lengths are
determined by the poet. The poem is divided into three movements,
the first of which is called the strophe. The second movement, called
the antistrophe, is identical to the first. The third and last movement
of the poem is called the stand or epode. Its form is strict also, but
entirely different from that of the first two movements.
Derived from the classical tragedy, the content of the strophe is an
argument in favor of a point-of-view spoken by a chorus on one side
of the stage. To consider the opposite view, the chorus travels to the
other side of the stage and voices its concerns. In the epode, the
chorus moves to center stage to deliver its conclusion upon the matter
under consideration. This internal form is still the tradition. See
DRAMATICS.
The English ode (or Keatsian ode) is accentual-syllabic. It

consists of three, ten-line iambic pentameter stanzas. Stanza one rhyme
English sonnet (abab) is attached to an Italian sEsTer (cdecde). Though J
has eleven-line stanzas. This poem adheres to the form, though it begir
The Man Hunter
"But we were born of risen apes, not fallen angels, and the apes were armed ki
When I saw, spinning webs of sense and dust,
The heart-shaped spider of the womb's demands,
I raised myself upright upon the crust
Of earth and issued it my first commands:
"Give me what I may take before the glass
Of time is empty as a brain's white bowl
Where slugs drink, where the mosses gorge and green."
I walked out of the forest, across the grass
It withered underneath my callous sole,
For I could not forget what I had seen.
I saw the scarab in the turning earth
Spinning murders from its golden shell;
I saw the rooting beast probing death,
But death must root if it would hope to dwell.
Therefore I walked the trench of lambs and ewes
With winter's humour snowing in my bones,
And in my web of veins the scratching, dumb,
Dry tongue of the beast feeding on my dews.
Then, when at last I lay down in these stones,
I knew that more of us would one day come.

Page 197
And you have come to find yourself in me
Here where I lie, a skull transformed to stone.
My sightless eyes look out at you and see
That under the eons we are still alone
But we are millions now who were a few
To forsake the forest and face time with a rock,
A naked rock held in a naked hand.
We face the ages still, and we bestrew
This cairn of stars with the remnants of our stock:
A jawbone here and there wearing to sand.
WESLI COURT
The HOMOSTROPHIC ODE (or Horatian Ode) consists of any number of formal
nonce stanzas:
An Ode to Himself
Where dost thou careless lie,
Buried in ease and sloth?
Knowledge that sleeps doth die;
And this security,
It is the common moth
That eats on wits and arts, and oft destroys them both:
Are all the Aonian springs
Dried up? Lies Thespia waste?
Doth Clarius' harp want strings,
That not a nymph now sings?
Or droop they as disgraced,
To see their seats and bowers by chattering 'pies defaced?
If hence thy silence be,
As 'tis too just a cause,
Let this thought quicken thee:
Minds that are great and free
Should not on fortune pause;
'Tis crown enough to virtue still, her own applause.

Page 198
They die with their conceits,
And only piteous scorn upon their folly waits.
Then take in hand thy lyre;
Strike in thy proper strain;
With Japhet's line aspire
Sol's chariot for new fire
To give the world again;
Who aided him will thee, the issue of Jove's brain.
And, since our dainty age
Cannot endure reproof,
Make not thyself a page
To that strumpet the stage;
But sing high and aloof,
Safe from the wolf's black jaw, and the dull ass's hoof.
BEN JONSON
A fourth type, the Cowleyan or irregular ode, is a loose form. It can be
described simply as a serious lyric that commemorates an event. It,
too, is a nonce form. An example is Wordsworth's "Ode: Intimations
of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood," widely
available in anthologies. In this case, the poem is variable, normative
accentual-syllabics, strophic, and randomly rhymed.
The French, syllabic RONSARDIAN ODE is, strictly speaking, a sTaNzA form.
Such an ode can be of any length, provided each stanza is nine lines
long, rhymes ababcdc, and varies its line-lengths between
decasyllabics and tetrasyllabics in a specific order. The last line is an
octosyllabic line:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. XXXXXXXXX

a
2. xXXb
3.XXXXXXXXX
a
4. XXXb
5.XXXXXXXXX
C
6.xXXXXXXXX
C

Page 199
linessyllables and
rhymes
8. xXXd
9.XXXXXXXс
See also LYRICS and OCCASIONALS.
Ottava Rima
An Italian sTanzA pattern. It can also be a complete poem. It is an OCTAVE
stanza in iambic pentameter lines, rhyming abababcc. Essentially,
ottava rima is a Sicilian sester expanded by the addition of a HEROIC
coUPLET. For contemporary examples, see Gjertrude Schnackenberg's
"How Did It Seem to Sylvia?" (a one-stanza poem) and David R.
Slavitt's longer, "Another Letter to Lord Byron," in Strong Measures
(op. cit.).
For related forms, see the Italian ocTave and the Sicilian ocTavE in the
section on the SONETTO RISPETTO.
Paean
see LYRICS.
Palinode
A Greek and Italian form. A palinode is a lyric "song of retraction" for
a derogatory statement that has been made. A set form consists of two
strophes and two antistrophes. These are nonce forms but, as in the
ode, the poet sets a pattern that must be adhered to throughout the
poem.
The pattern of the first strophe is mirrored in the last antistrophe; the

pattern of the second strophe is mirrored in the first antistrophe:
strophe A, strophe B, antistrophe B, antistrophe A, in that order. The
two strophes might be the statement, and the two antistrophes might
be the retraction. Technically, the two (differing) strophes are called
the ode, and the two (differing) antistrophes are the palinode proper.

Page 200
Palinode
When I was young and light of heart
I made sad songs with easy art:
Now I am sad, and no more young,
My sorrow cannot find a tongue.
II.
Pray, Muses, since I may not sing
Of Death or any grievous thing,
Teach me some joyous strain, that I
May mock my youth's hypocrisy!
THOMAS BAILEY ALDRICH
Panegyric
see ENCOMIUM, LYRICS.
Pantoum
A Malayan form. Accentual-syllabic. Lines can be of any single
length in any particular meter. A pantoum consists of an indefinite
number of quatrain stanzas with particular restrictions: lines two and
four of each stanza, in their entirety, are repetonsthey become lines
one and three of the following stanza, and so on. The rhyme scheme is
interlocking.
The poem can be ended in one of two ways: either in a QuATrAIN whose
repetons are lines one and three of the first stanza in reversed order,
or in a repeton couplet consisting of lines one and three of the first
stanza in reversed order. The pattern for a four-stanza poem would be:
linesrhymes and
repetons

1. A1
2. B1
3. A2
4. B2
5. B1
6. C1
7. B2
8. C2
9. C1
10. D1
11. C2
12. D2
13. Z1 or A2
14. A2 or A1
15. Z2
16. A1

Page 201
The Eunuch Cat
She went to work until she grew too old,
Came home at night to feed the eunuch cat
That kept the mat warm and its eyeballs cold.
She walked, but ran to wrinkles, then to fat,
Came home at night to feed the eunuch cat,
Then went to bed, slept dreamlessly till eight,
And waked. She ran to wrinkles, then to fat.
She fixed her supper, snacked till it was late,
Then went to bed, slept dreamlessly till eight
Must I go on? She'll feed the cat no more.
She fixed her supper, snacked till it was late,
Then died at dawn, just halfway through a snore.
Must I go on?she'll feed the cat no more
To keep the mat warm and its eyeballs cold
She died at dawn, just halfway through a snore;
She went to work until she grew too old.
WESLI COURT
For other examples of contemporary pantoums, see "A Pantoum for
Morning" by Claire McAllister in Poetry (op. cit.); see also several
pantoums, including variations, by John Ashbery, Donald Justice,
Thomas Lux, Peter Meinke, and Pamela Stewart in Strong Measures
(op. cit.).
Passion Play
see DRAMATICS.
Pastoral, Pastorale
see BUCOLICS.
Pastoral Elegy, Pastoral Ode

see BUCOLICS, LYRICS, OCCASIONALS.
Pastourelle
see BUCOLICS and NARRATIVES.
Petrachan Sonnet
see ITALIAN SONNET.
Picture Poem
see SPATIALS.
Pindaric Ode
see OCCASIONALS and ODE.
Plampede
see INTERLUDE.

Page 202
Posie
Single verse or couplet of an epigrammatic or aphoristic nature. See
EPIGRAM, MOTE, MOTTO.
Poulter's Measure
English. Accentual-syllabic. Rhymed. A coupLer that alternates the
ALEXANDRINE (see also SPENSERIAN STANZA) with the SEPTENARY Of FOURTEENER. There
can be any number of couplets in a stanza or poem.
The alexandrine is a line of iambic hexameter verse:
xx XX XX XX XX XX.
The fourteener was, in Latin verse, a line consisting of seven metrical
feet. In English verse, the line contains fourteen syllables arranged in
iambics, with a caesura appearing somewhere in the center of the line
(after the third foot):
XXXXXXXX - XXXX xX.
A schematic of one couplet of Poulter's measure looks like this:
lines
1.
meter, cesar, and rhymes
2.
XXxX xX• xX xx xx xá
This next poem is written in fourteeners (each two lines equals one
fourteener):
To Old Nobodaddy
Why art thou silent and invisible,
Father of Jealousy?
Why dost thou hide thyself in clouds
From every searching eye?
Why darkness and obscurity
In all thy words and laws,

Page 203
That none dare eat the fruit but from
The wily serpent's jaws?
Or is it because secrecy
Gains feminine applause?
WILLIAM BLAKE
Primer Couplet
see DIDACTICS.
Prose Poem
If a poem is not written in versein a metrical prosodythen it is written
in prose. Usually the lines are determined by line-phrasingthat is, lines
are phrases or some other unit of grammar. An example is Christopher
Smart's "Of the Spiritual Musick," to be found elsewhere in these
pages.
Sometimes prose poems are built on a particular schema, as for
instance in "A Portrait of the Day," by Bill Sloan in Alberta Turner's
Poets Teaching (op. cit.), which is based on the schema epanodis. A
discussion accompanies the poem.
This next poem was composed in the prose prosody first used in
English by Ezra Pound in his translation of the Shih-ching
(Cambridge, 1954), notably in "Book I. Chou and the South," nos. II,
IV, and VI. Certain features of this prosody include lines of uneven
length, some of which are repeated incrementally, true rhyme
occasionally but consonance usually, and repetition and echo. The
effect of this prosody is to make prose as lyrical a vehicle for poetry
as is traditional (since Chaucer) accentual-syllabic prosody:
Dawn Song
….. world of the first rose, and the first lark's song. "Margaret Mead
I am the first to know dawn for the dawn

Page 204
I am the first to see the sharp sun dawn,
Breaking across my terror and my surprise;
To know that I am the beast who knows his name:
Beast of the Sun, beast of the spinning sun
Of the world of the first rose, and the first lark's song.
I am the first to see stone for a stone,
To heft it in my hand, to feel its weight
and know what it may do to the brittle bone
Of the beasts of the sun, in the morning of the sun,
In the world of the first rose, and the first lark's song.
I see, and my sight is hard, hard as the stone
Held in my hand, and this stone will be my fate.
The beast is my brotherbeast is his only name.
He is the child of dust. I am stone's son,
Born of the first rose, and the first lark's song.
WESI.I COURT
NAsHers, named after their inventor Ogden Nash, are couplets usually
composed of long lines of flat prose with humorous, often
multisyllabic endings utilizing wrenched rhymes. Nashers are often
used satirically. For another satiric form built on an opposite prosody,
see skeLTonics in the section concerned with SATRIcS. See also the CATALoG.
Prothalamion, Prothalamium
see LYRICS, OCCASIONALS.
Qasida
see COUPLET.
Quatorzain
see BREF DOUBLE.
Quatrain

A stanza or poem consisting of four lines. It can be written in any
meter and line-length, rhymed or unrhymed. This poem uses analyzed
rhyme:
Winter
The wind keens on the bare hill;
The ford is froar, and the lake

Page 205
Is hoar-crusted. A man's ilk
Might stand on a single stalk.
Comber after comber comes
To cover the shore. The gale
Hovers over the hill: owls
Crying. One cannot stand tall.
The bed of the fish is cold
In the ice where they shelter.
Reeds are bearded; the stag, starved.
Trees bow in the early dusk.
Snow falls, and the earth is pale.
Warriors sit near their fires.
The lake is a dim defile:
No warmth is in its color.
Snow falls; the hoarfrost is white;
The shield is idle upon
The old man's shoulder. The wind
Freezes the grass with its whine.
Snow falls on top of the ice.
Wind sweeps the crest of the trees
Standing close. On his shoulder
The brave fighter's fine shield shines.
ANONYMOUS
The ENVELOPE STANZA is a quatrain that rhymes abba. The so-called In
MEMORIAM STANZA is an iambic tetrameter envelope stanza. The REDONDILLA, a
Spanish form of the envelope stanza, is an octosyllabic (in English
measures, iambic tetrameter) quatrain, rhyming abba, abab, or aabb.
The ITALIAN QUATRAIN is an envelope stanza written in iambic pentameter
measures:

Page 206
lines
meters and rhymes
3.
xx xx xx xx xb
4.
XX XX xX xx xá
Doubled, it becomes the ITALIaN ocTave, which is utilized in the Italian
SONNET. The Italian quatrain is a form of HEROIC STANZA.
The Sicilian QuATrAIn is also a set form of the HERoIC StanzA and is the
pattern for the quatrain of the English soNNEr. It is the same as the
Italian octave, except that it rhymes abab. Doubled, it becomes the
Sicilian ocTave.
There are examples of quatrain forms throughout these pages,
including poems by William Blake and Emily Dickinson, both of
whom used them almost exclusively. See also Strong Measures (op.
cit.) for examples of the various kinds of quatrains.
For other set forms and uses of the quatrain see the sections on AE
FREISLIGHE, ALCAICS, AWDL GYWYDD, BALLAD STANZA, BYR A THODDAID, CASBAIRDNE, COMMON MEASURE,
DEIBHIDHE, the ENGLYNS, GWAWDODYN, KYRIELLE, PANTOUM, the RANNAIGHEACHTS, RIONNAIRD TRI-
NARD, RISPETTO, ROUNDEL, RUBAI, SAPPHICS, SEADNA, SNEADBHAIRDNE, and TODDAID.
Quintet
A poem or stanza consisting of five lines. It can be in any meter and
line-length, rhymed or unrhymed.
The SICILIAN QuINTer is written in iambic pentameter measures, and it
rhymes ababa. The quintilLa, a Spanish form, is any octosyllabic (in
English measures, iambic tetrameter) quintet rhyming ababa, abbab,
ababb, abaab, aabab, or aabba. The ENveLoPe QuInTer rhymes abcba or
abbba. The ENGLIsH quInter is any quintet rhyming ababb. For examples
of this form, see Robert Penn Warren's "Original Sin: A Short Story"
and Randall Jarrell's "Eighth Air Force," both in Strong Measures (op.
cit.).

Page 207
The poems titled "Party Game" and "Poetry" earlier in these pages are
written in quintet stanzas; the former is a quINTILLA in normative
accentual-syllabics, the latter, a NoNce Form in quantitative syllabics
broken into verse paragraphs as well as in quintet stanzas.
Quintilla
see QUINTET.
Randaigecht Chetharchubaid
see RANNAIGHEACHTS.
Rannaigheacht Bheag, Ghairid, Mhór
see RANNAIGHEACHTS.
Rannaigheachts (ron-áyach)
Irish. Syllabic. RANNAIGHEACHT CHAIRID (ron-áyach chárrid) is a QUATRAIN STANZA.
The first line is three syllables long, the rest are seven syllables in
length. The quatrain single-rhymes aaba. Line three (3) cross-rhymes
with line four (4).
In all the Irish forms in this section and elsewhere, the poem (not the
stanza) ends with the same first syllable, word, or line with which it
begins. The diagram for one stanza is thus:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1.
xx a
2.
xxxxxx
a
3.

4. xxXXX
a
In the following poem, the first line is a full line of seven syllables,
not three, nor does the verse observe the circle-back convention:
Pocoangelini 10
Pocoangelini's feet
Were like two shovels. His beat
was down by the waterfront
where barges shunt and the neat

Page 208
gulls rudder
through the air; where the shudder
of engines among pilings
and piers makes silence flutter
down the bay
like a flight of pigeons. Day
after day Poco, in big
shoes, would wiggle knobs on gray
doors and swing
his billy. Then, one evening,
at his rattle a door flew
loosely wide. He stood staring
on thresholds
of shadow into great folds
of darkness that hung down from
the rafters. Marigolds
were the first
to bloom into his eyes. Worst
of all were the irises
rising from the thirst-
raging well
of the warehouse. Then a bell's
sound, like snowdrop swans swimming,
came brimming his ears. It fell
and gently
lay near his shoes: quite simply,
these had shrunk. He moved one pace
forward and was amazedthe

ache vanished
as the monstrous garden washed
toward him like a rainbow
sea. Now fright drowned him; it dashed
the door to
behind him. Poco's blue
figure hurtled down the street.
His feet throbbed and burned. He knew

Page 209
they were blown
big as balloons again. Down
the walk he ran, stumbling, till
his shoes had swollen, had grown
back to their
former size. He would not stare
at so much gross beauty for
the fairest, the straightest pair
of strong feet
on the Force. Back on his beat
the gulls ruddered in the air,
wove rare threads through his retreat.
L. T.
When the lines in this form end in disyllables instead of
monosyllables, the form is called RANDAIGECHT CHETHARCHUBAID GARIT RECOMARCACH
(ron-di-guech chey-er-hu-did gár-red ray-cúm-ar-cach).
RannAIGHeaCht mHór (ron-áyach voor) is a quatrainstanza of heptasyllabic
lines consonating abab. There are at least two cross-rhymes in each
couplet of this form, and the final word of line three (3) rhymes with a
word in the interior of line four (4). The internal rhyme in the first
couplet can consonate rather than rhyme. In the second couplet, the
rhymes must be exact. Two words alliterate in each line, the final
word of line four (4) alliterating with the preceding stressed word. A
simplified schematic would be:
limes
syllables, cross-rhymes, and consonations
I.
xxx xbxac
—lines 1 and 3, 2 and 4
2.
xxxax x bc
3-
xxxxxac
4.
xxxxx bc
This poem observes all the conventions:

Page 210
Cock and hen hover, a-wing,
Where I bring pen and parchment
But the grey-hooded cuckoo
From his fastness mocks my mood.
Good grief! May God save those who
Would write well in the wildwood!
ANONYMOUS
RANNAIGHEACHT BHeAc (ron-áyah viog) is the same, except the line endings
are disyllabic. DEACHNADH MoR (dagnáw-moor) is also the same, except
that lines one (1) and three (3) are octosyllabic, lines two (2) and four
(4) are hexasyllabic, and all line endings are disyllabic words.
Redondilla
see QUATRAIN.
Renga
see TANKA.
Reveille
see ALBA, AUBADE, LYRICS.
Rhupunt (rhée-pint)
Welsh. Syllabic. A line of three, four, or five sections. Each section
contains four syllables. All but the last section rhyme with each other.
The last section carries the main rhyme from line to line (or from
stanza to stanza, depending on how the lines are set up; that is, each
section can be written on the page as a single line of verse).
In this pattern, each section is treated as one line, and each set of
sections is treated as one stanza:

lines (or sections)
I.
2.
3-
4.
syllables and rhymes
xxxa
6.
7.
xxx B
xXXC
xxxC
xXXC
xxxB
one line
• one line

Page 211
After two lines (sets of sections), the main rhyme can change:
A Winter Song
I have one song:
Stags are groaning,
Clouds are snowing
Summer is gone.
Swiftly the sun
Settles beyond
The horizon,
Louring and wan.
The wild geese mourn
Down the grey storm;
Fallen is fern,
Tattered and brown.
The bird's feather
Is clogged with hoar;
This is my lore
Summer is gone.
ANONYMOUS
TAwDDgyRcH cadwynoG (tówdd-girch ca-dóy-nog) is, similarly, a line of
three, four, or five sections. Each section contains four syllables. The
rhyme scheme is abbc. Each section must rhyme with its
corresponding section in at least one other line of verse. If desired,
each section can be written as one line of verse. In the following
schematic diagram, each section is treated as one line, and each set of
sections is treated as one stanza:
lines (or sections)
I.
2.
3-
4.
syllables and rhymes
xxxa
xxxb
one line
xxxb
xxxc

Page 212
lines (or sections)
syllables and rhymes
xxxa
xxxb
one line
7-
8.
Riddle
xxx b
XxXC
After two lines (or sets of sections), the rhymes may change.
see DIDACTICS
Rimas Dissolutas
Originally French. Syllabic. Lines can be of any single length, and
there can be any number of lines in a stanza. Lines within a stanza do
not rhyme, but corresponding lines in subsequent stanzas do rhyme.
The scheme for a quintet stanza of eight syllables is:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1.xxxxxxxа
2.xxxxxxxb
3. XXXXXXXC
4.xXXXXXXd
5. xXXXXXXe
6. xxXXXXXa
7.xXXXXXXb
8. xXXXXXX
9.XXXXXXX0
10. xxxxxxxe

For an example of a contemporary poem in this form, see David
Wagoner's "Staying Alive" in Poetry (op. cit.). This poem can also be
found in Strong Measures (op. cit.), together with Sylvia Plath's
"Black Root in Rainy Weather," Jon Anderson's "The Blue Animals,"
and several others.
Rime Couée
French. Syllabic. A SEsTET STAnza made of two couplets of any single
length and two shorter lines. One short line follows each couplet. The
short lines rhyme with each other. A schematic diagram of rime couée
in iambics would be:

Page 213
limes
meters and rhymes
1.
XX XX XX xa
2.
xx xxxx xá
3.
xx xx xb
4.
S.
6.
xx xx xx xc or xá
xxxx x6
The Scottish BURNS STANZA OF STANDARD HABBIE, a Variation, rhymes
a4a4a4b2a4b2. Following are two stanzas of a Burns poem written in
standard habbie:
To a Mouse, on Turning Her Up in Her Nest with the
Plough, November, 1785
Wee, sleekit, cow'rin, tim'rous beastie,
O, what a panic's in thy breastie!
Thou need na start awa sae hasty,
Wi' bickering brattle!
I wad be laith to rin an' chase thee,
Wi' murd'ring pattle!
I'm truly sorry man's dominion
Has broken Nature's social union,
An' justifies that ill opinion,
Which makes thee startle
At me, thy poor, earth-born companion,
An fellow-mortal!
ROBERT BURNS
Rime Royal
An English-Scottish form. Accentual-syllabic. A septer stanzA rhyming
ababbcc. The lines are written in iambic pentameter measures. For an
example of rime royal, see Chaucer's "Complaint to His Purse" in the
section on the BALLADe. Contemporary examples by Philip Dacey ("Jack,

Page 214
Afterwards") and Al Lee ("Beside My Grandmother") can be found in
Strong Measures (op. cit.).
Rionnaird Tri-Nard (rún-ard tree-nard)
Irish. Syllabic. A QUATRAIN STaNzA of hexasyllabic lines with disyllabic
endings. Lines two (2) and four (4) rhyme, and line three (3)
consonates with them. There are two cross-rhymes in the second
couplet, none in the first. There is alliteration in each line, and the last
syllable of line one (1) alliterates with the first accented word of line
two (2). There are two cross-rhymes in the second couplet, none in the
first.
The poem, not the stanza, ends with the same first syllable, word, or
line with which it begins:
linessyllables and rhymes
1. xXXx (xa)
2. XXXX (xbc)
3. x b xx (x c)line 3 consonates with
lines 2 and 4
4. XXCX (xbc)
Rispetto
An Italian form. Accentual-syllabic. Any complete poem consisting of
two rhyming QuatraIns, often rhyming abab codd. Many rispettos are
written in iambic tetrameter measures, like the example here:
Two Epigrams
When I stand with the young bloods,

Then my fierce red blood is up;
When I sit with the greybeards,
I nod sagely in my cup.
Sad to see the sons of lore
Damned to the eternal fire
While these pigs, illiterate,
In God's glory corruscate.
ANONYMOUS

Page 215
If the rispetto is written in iambic pentameter measures, it can
combine heroic formsthe Sicilian and Italian quatrains, or a Sicilian
quatrain and two heroic couplets. It thus becomes a HEROIC RISPETTO.
For contemporary examples of the rispetto, see Strong Measures (op.
cit.).
Romance
see LYRICS and NARRATIVES.
Rondeau
French. Syllabic or accentual-syllabic. The long lines of this form can
be of any single length; the same is true for the short lines. The
rondeau has fifteen lines divided into three stanzas: one QuINTET, One
QUATRAIN, and one sEsTEr. The poem turns on two rhymes and is built on
one refrain. The refrain consists of the first few words of the first line.
In this schematic diagram, the refrain is represented by the letter R:
linesrhymes and refrains
1.
...Rafirst line contains
refrain
2. a
3. b
4. b
5. a
6. a
7. a
8. b

9.
... Rrefrain
10. a
11. a
12. b
13. b
14. a
15. ... R
Rondeau
Help me to seek, for I lost it there,
And if that ye have found it, ye that be here,
And seek to convey it secretly,
Handle it soft and treat it tenderly,
Or else it will plain and then appear:
But rather restore it mannerly,
Since that I do ask it thus honestly:

Page 216
For to lose it, it sitteth me too near.
Help me to seek
Alas, and is there no remedy?
But have I thus lost it wilfully?
Iwis it was a thing all too dear
To be bestowed and wist not where
It was my heart, I pray you heartily,
Help me to seek.
THOMAS WYATT
This next example was written by a Black American poet:
We Wear the Mask
We wear the mask that grins and lies,
It hides our cheeks and shades our eyes
This debt we pay to human guile;
With torn and bleeding hearts we smile,
And mouth with myriad subtleties.
Why should the world be otherwise,
In counting all our tears and sighs?
Nay, let them only see us while
We wear the mask.
We smile, but, O great Christ, our cries
To thee from tortured souls arise.
We sing, but oh the clay is vile
Beneath our feet, and long the mile;
But let the world dream otherwise,
We wear the mask.
PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR
For contemporary examples of the rondeau, see "Is It Well Lighted,
Papa?" by James Bertram, "Rondeau After a Transatlantic Telephone
Call" by Marilyn Hacker, and "Death of a Vermont Farm Woman" by

Page 217
Rondeau Redoubled
The French rondeau redoublé consists of twenty-four lines of any
single length, plus a twenty-fifth coda linea refrainmade up of the first
few words of the first line. These lines are divided into five QUATRAINS
and one QuINTEr. Stanza one rhymes (RA1)B1A2B2; each line in this first
quatrain, which is a texte, is a refrain. Counting the internal refrain
shown here as R, this texte contains five refrains.
The entire first line of the poem reappears as line eight (8), ending the
second stanza; line two reappears as line twelve (12), ending the third
stanza; line three reappears as line sixteen (16), ending the fourth
stanza; line four reappears as line twenty (20), ending the fifth stanza;
and the first few words of line one reappear as line twenty-five (25),
ending the poem. The diagram:
lines
rhymes and refrains
t 1. ...R Alline contains a refrain
and is one.
e 2. Birefrain
x 3. Azrefrain
t4. B2refrain
e
5.
b
6.
a
7. b
8. Alrefrain

9. a
10. b
11. a
12. Birefrain
13. b
14. a
15. b
16. Arrefrain
17. a
18. b
19. a
20. Bzrefrain
21. b
22. a
23. b
24. a
25. ... Rrefrain

Page 218
Jason Potter
(from Bordello)
Suddenly, nothing was left of all those
years we'd spent together in the same house,
under that old mansard that bent and rose
above us, gracefully guarding. The spruce
in the dooryard spired out of the grass
like a steeple, pulling us taut as bows
both generations. But age is a noose:
suddenly, nothing was left of all those
mornings and nights. I, Jason Potter, chose
to lay away my helpmeet and my spouse
in a lone bed. So ended my repose.
Years we'd spent together in the same house
became beads to tell, the string brokenloose
time come unstrung. Still, outside, the spruce grows,
and it is nature to try to mend loss.
Under that old mansard that bent and rose
over the life we'd built, my blood still flows
in fever now and then. I make my truce
with flesh through these paid women whom I use.
Above us, guarding and graceful, the spruce
used to seem a symbol of common use
and fulfillment of self and heartthose blues
tipping sheer limbs sharply; strong and close
and clean, the bole and needles of pure hues ....
Suddenly, nothing was left.
L. T.

For a similar form, see the gLose, as well as the soNNeT REDouBleD and the
CAROL.
Rondel
French. Syllabic or accentual-syllabic. Thirteen lines of any single
length divided into three stanzas, two QuATrAINs and one QuINTEr. The
poem turns on two rhymes and is built on

Page 219
a two-line refrain. The first line reappears as line seven (7) and as line
thirteen (13), which ends the poem. The second line reappears as line
eight (8), which ends the second stanza:
rhymes and
lines refrains
1. Arefrain
2. Brefrain
3. b
4. a
5. a
6. b
7. Arefrain
8. Brefrain
9. a
10. b
12. a
13. Arefrain
Rondel of Charles D'Orleans
To his Mistress, to succour his heart
that is beleaguered by jealousy.
Strengthen, my Love, this castle of my heart,

And with some store of pleasure give me aid,
For Jealousy, with all them of his part,
Strong siege about the weary tower has laid.
Nay, if to break his hands thou art afraid,
Too weak to make his cruel force depart,
Strengthen at least this castle of my heart,
And with some store of pleasure give me aid.
Nay, let not Jealousy, for all his art
Be master, and the tower in ruin laid,
That still, ah Love! thy gracious rule obeyed.
Advance, and give me succour of thy part;
Strengthen, my Love, this castle of my heart.
ANDREW LANG
The ronder suPreme is one line longer. The double refrain forms lines
thirteen (13) and fourteen (14); thus, the last stanza would be a SESTEr
instead of a quintet, and the scheme would look like this:
9.a
10.b
11.b

Page 220
12.a
13.Arefrain
14.Brefrain
Confessional
My ghostly father, let me confess,
First to God and then to you,
That at a windowdo you know how?
I stole a kiss of great sweetness:
It was done without advisedness,
But it is done, not undone now.
My ghostly father, let me confess,
First to God and then to you.
But it shall be restored, doubtless,
For kisses one should rebestow,
And that to God I make this vow,
Otherwise I ask forgiveness,
My ghostly father, let me confess,
First to God and then to you.
CHARLES D'ORLEANS
For examples of contemporary rondels, see Philip Dacey's "Rondel"
and X. J. Kennedy's poem of the same title in Strong Measures (op.
cit.).
Rondelet
French. Syllabic or accentual-syllabic. The first line is a refrain that
reappears as lines three (3) and seven (7). The refrain is four syllables
or two verse feet in length. The rest of the lines (2, 4, 5, and 8) are
eight syllables or four verse feet in length. Line four (4) rhymes with

the refrain. Lines two (2), five (5), and six (6) have their own rhyme:
linessyllables, rhymes, and
refrains
1. XXX Arefrain
2. xXXXXXx b
3. xxx Aretrain

Page 221
linessyllables, rhymes, and
refrains
4. xxxxxxx
5.xXXXXXXb
6.xxxxxxxb
7. XXX Arefrain
The Swift Replies
The swift replies
Fall from air to the ear in Spring.
The swift replies
To the phoebe who sounds her sighs,
To dovecall, the catbird crying
And when the owl goes questioning,
The swift replies.
WESLI COURT
Rondine
French. Syllabic or accentual-syllabic. Lines can be of any single
length. The rondine consists of twelve lines divided into two stanzas
that rhyme (Ra)bbaabR abbaR. The refrain is the first word or phrase
of the first line; it reappears as line seven (7) and again as line twelve
(12), ending the poem:
linesrhymes and refrains
1.
...R Rarefrain is
the first word or
phrase

2. b
3. b
4. a
5. a
6. b
7. ... Rrefrain
8. a
9. b
10. b
11. a
12. ... Rrefrain
Ronsardian Ode
see ODE.
Round
see ROUNDELAY.

Page 222
Roundel
An English form. Accentual-syllabic. Lines can be of any single
length. Eleven lines are broken into three stanzas: a QUATRAIN, a TRIPLET,
and a QuatraIn, in that order. The poem turns on two rhymes and is built
on one refrain. The refrain consists of the first word or group of
words in the first line. The refrain (R) rhymes internally with the last
word of the second line. Short scheme: (Rba)baRb bab abaRb. The
diagram:
lines rhymes and refrain
1.
... Rb alst line
contains rhyming
refrain
2.b
3. a
4. ... Rbrefrain
5. b
6. a
7. b
8. a
9. b
10. a
11. ... Rbrefrain
The Way of the Wind

The wind's way in the deep sky's hollow
None may measure, as none can say
How the heart in her shows the swallow
The wind's way.
Hope nor fear can avail to stay
Waves that whiten on wrecks that wallow,
Times and seasons that wane and slay.
Life and love, till the strong night swallow
Thought and hope and the red last ray,
Swim the waters of years that follow
The wind's way.
ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE
For a contemporary example, see Loring Williams' "A Sad Old Sot" in
Poetry (op. cit.).

Page 223
Roundelay
Though the definition of a roundelay is any simple lyric that utilizes a
refrain, John Dryden invented a very complex set form: twenty-four
lines, turning on two rhymes, in four sestet stanzas. Except for lines
one (1) and two (2) of the first stanza and lines three (3) and four (4)
of the fourth stanza, all lines are repetons or refrains, each
reappearing at least once elsewhere in the poem, in a certain order:
lines rhymes
1. a
2. b
3. A1
4. B1
5. A2
6. B2
7. A1
8. B1
9. A3
10. B3
11. A2
12. B2
13. A3
14. B3

15. A4
16. B4
17. A2
18. B2
19. A4
20. B4
21. a
22. b
23. A2
24. B2
Although Dryden's metric is trochaic tetrameter, assumedly the lines
can be of any particular meter, in any single length:
Roundelay
Chloe found Amyntas lying,
All in tears, upon the plain,
Sighing to himself, and crying,
"Wretched I, to love in vain!
Kiss me, dear, before my dying;
Kiss me once and ease my pain."
Sighing to himself, and crying,
"Wretched I, to love in vain!
Ever scorning, and denying
To reward your faithful swain:
Kiss me, dear, before my dying;
Kiss me once, and ease my pain!
"Ever scorning, and denying
To reward your faithful swain."

Page 224
"Kiss me, dear, before my dying;
Kiss me once, and ease my pain!"
Chloe, laughing at his crying,
Told him that he loved in vain;
But repenting, and complying,
When he kissed, she kissed again
Kissed him up before his dying;
Kissed him up and eased his pain.
JOHN DRYDEN
See also the RounDeLAy in the LYRIcs Section.
Rubai
Arabic. Accentual-syllabic. A poem consisting of one quatraIn rhyming
aaba. Lines are either tetrameter or pentameter. A RuBaIyar is a poem
made of these quatrains used as stanzas.
In the INTERLOCKING RuBAIYaT, the end-sound of line three (3) in the first
stanza becomes the rhyme in the second stanza; the same is true for
succeeding stanzas, each picking up its rhyme from the third line of
the preceding stanza. In the last stanza, the third line takes its end-
sound from the rhyme of the first stanza. The schematic for a poem of
four stanzas would be:
lines rhymes
1. a
2. a
3. b
4. a
5. b

6. b
7. C
8. b
9. C
10. c
11. d
12. c
13. d
14. d
15. a
16. d
Robert Frost's "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening" is the best
known modern example of an interlocking rubaiyat, though it has a
variant ending. Other examples of contemporary rubaiyats are Gary
Gildner's "Meeting My Best Friend from the Eighth Grade" and Miller
Williams' "Rubaiyat for Sue Ella Tucker" in Strong Measures (op.
cit.). For

Page 225
other forms that use interlocking rhyme, see TERzA RIMA and the TERZANELLE.
Rune
A letter of the Anglo-Saxon alphabet. A cHaRM poem that utilizes runes
or runic lore. See "The Mystery" by Amergin.
Sapphics
A Greek form. Quantitative accentual-syllabics. Unrhymed. In
English meters, a sapPHIcLiNe consists of eleven syllables and five verse
feet, the central foot being a dactyl. The other four feet, two on either
side of the central dactyl, are trochees. The rhythms of each line are
falling rhythmsthe accents of all verse feet fall on the first
syllableexcept where variations are allowed: a spondee can be
substituted for a trochee in lines one (1) and two (2), feet two and
five; and in line three (3), foot fivesee the italicized portions of the
diagram below.
A SAPPHIC STANZA iS a QuATrAIn composed of three such lines plus one that is
shorter, called an Adonic: one dactyl followed by one trochee. There can
be any number of stanzas in a Sapphic poem:
limes
meters
1.
xxxxxxxxx*
2.
xxxx xxxxxxx
3-
xxxxxxxxx*.
4.
xxxxx
Sapphics
If mine eyes can speak to do hearty errand,
Or mine eyes' language she do hap to judge of,
So that eyes' message be of her receivéd,
Hope, we do live yet.

Page 226
But if eye fail then, when I most do need them,
Or if eyes' language be not to her known,
So that eyes' message do return rejected,
Hope, we do both die.
Yet, dying and dead, do we sing her honour;
So become our tombs monuments of her praise;
So becomes our loss the triumph of her gain;
Here be the glory.
If the spheres senseless do yet hold a music,
If the swan's sweet voice be not heard but at death,
If the mute timber when it hath the life lost
Yieldeth a lute's tune,
Are then human minds privileged so meanly
As that hateful Death can abridge them of power
With the vow of truth to record to all worlds
That we be her spoils?
Thus, not ending, ends the due praise of her praise:
Fleshly veil consumes, but a soul hath his life
Which is held in love: love it is that hath joined
Life to this our soul.
But if eyes can speak to do hearty errand,
Or mine eyes' language she do hap to judge of,
So that eyes' message be of her received,
Hope, we do live yet.
PHILIP SIDNEY
Sidney's meters are not easy to hear in these modern days; perhaps
they were never easy to hear. For a contemporary Sapphic poem with
the first and fourth lines scanned, see "Visitor" in Poetry (op. cit.); see
also Charles O. Hartman's "A Little Song," William Meredith's "Effort
at Speech," and Timothy Steele's "Sapphics Against Anger" in Strong
Measures (op. cit.).

Page 227
major forms of satire are the epigraM and the LITErary ePItaPH. The epigram
has been described as "terse verse with a cutting edge":
On Maids and Cats
A nimble cat and lazy maid,
Breed household feuds and are no aid;
But lazy cats and nimble maids,
Beyond all doubt, are greater plagues.
Once, now and then, the cat may eat,
But snoops the maid in every plate,
And makes the purse and cellar low.
How e'er it hits, there is no dough.
HENRICUS SELYNS
The pun, of course, is on the word dough, and pun is often an element
of satire. It may come as something of a surprise to discover that
"dough" is of so ancient a lineage as a synonym for money; and, since
dough baked is "bread," how hep is hip?
The literary epitaph is similar, except that it is cast in the form of an
inscription for a headstone; it has been described as "terse verse for
the long gone.
"
This Morning Tom Child, the Painter, Died
Tom Child had often painted Death,
But never to the Life, before:
Doing it now, he's out of breath;
He paints it once, and paints no more.
SAMUEL SEWALL
SkeLtonics, which are insistently rhymed dipodic lines, have been
discussed elsewhere as a vehicle for satire. Here are a few lines by the
inventor of the form:
Justice Now

Page 228
Is lain down to sleep,
And taketh no keep:
And Right is over the fallows
Gone to seek hallows,
With Reason together,
No man can tell whither.
No man will undertake
The first twain to wake;
And the twain last
Be withheld so fast
With money, as say men,
They cannot come again.
JOHN SKELTON
For an example of a long satireon contemporary poetrywritten in
Skeltonics, see Wesli Court's "Odds Bodkin's Strange Thrusts and
Ravels" in Poetry (op. cit.).
An opposite prosody is the Nasher, also used as a vehicle for mockery.
HuDIBrAstics are irregular tetrameter lines rhymed humorously in
couplets. The FaBlIau, mentioned earlier, is a satiric form, as is the
SIRVENTE, a lyric satire on religion or public matters.
Rough meters such as Skeltonics and Hudibrastics are modes of
doggerel verse. The term doggerel has often been used in a pejorative
sense to mean verse written by someone with little skill, but doggerel
can be used deliberately for broad comic effect.
The following poem is made up of seven discrete but the-matically
related Gaelic epigrams by various ancient, anonymous authors. The
form is heptasyllabic quatrains, rhyming or consonating abab or abcb,
as in several of the Irish bardic rannaigheacht stanzas:
Gaelic Stanzas I
What, my Lord, shall I do with

Page 229
The wind is dark, howling hard,
Tossing Ocean's hoary hair.
Tonight the dragon-boats' horde
Will not char my white bones bare.
If the sere leaves were golden
In the forest in the fall,
And the sea's whitecaps silver,
Finn would have bestowed them all
My patron gives no horses
For the poems I write now.
He grants beasts as best he can:
For an elegy, a cow.
The famished winter wind keens,
The lakes glitter, the brooks flash,
The hoarfrost chimbles the leaves,
The white combers froth and clash.
I can't tell with whom she'll sleep,
But I'm certain to the bone
That blonde, beauteous Etan
Will not go to bed alone.
Bell of chiming cold and clear
On a night of hurtling wind,
Much better to tryst with you
Than to tumble, hag-entwined!
ANONYMOUS
See the section on satirics in Poetry (op. cit.) for other epigrams and for
P. J. O'Brien's satire, "Cartoon Show," on the Popeye television
shows. There are many other satirical poems throughout this book.
See also the sIRveNtE in the LyrIcs Section and CAPITOLO Under TERZA RIMA.
Séadna (sháy-na)

Page 230
three (3) rhymes with the stressed word preceding the final word of
line four (4). There are two cross-rhymes in the second couplet. There
is alliteration in each line, the final word of line four (4) alliterating
with the preceding stressed word. The final syllable of line one (1)
alliterates with the first stressed word of line two (2).
The poem (not the stanza) ends with the same first syllable, word, or
line with which it begins. A simplified version:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. xxxxxxx
2.xxxxxxb
3.XXXXСXХС
SEADNA mór (sháy-na moor) is the same except that lines two (2) and
four (4) have trisyllabic endings.
Sedoka
Parts of Wallace Stevens' "Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird,"
which is widely available and can be found in Poetry (op. cit.), look
very much like monDos, katauras, or other Japanese forms, including the
SEDOKA. The sedoka is a poem, not necessarily of the question-answer
mondo pattern, that is made up of two katautas (5-7-7, 5-7-7 syllable
count). A turn (as in the Italian sonner and the TANKA) takes place
between the two TRIPLET STANZAs. It can be a dialogue, but the poem is
written by a single author:
Dialogue

Page 231
See the other Japanese forms for related structures, in particular the
MoNDo and the KATAUTA.
Senryu
see HAIKU.
Septenary
see POULTER'S MEASURE.
Septet
A stanza or poem consisting of seven lines in any meter, rhymed or
unrhymed. The siciliaN septer is written in iambic pentameter measures,
rhyming abababa. For other set forms and uses of the septet, see the
sections on RIMe RoYAL and the RoNDELET. For examples of contemporary
poems written in septets, see the various poems listed in Strong
Measures (op. cit.). Here is a nonce septet:
Upon His Leaving His Mistress
'Tis not that I am weary grown
Of being yours, and yours alone;
But with what face can I incline
To damn you to be only mine?
You, whom some kinder power did fashion,
By merit and by inclination,
The joy at least of one whole nation.
Let meaner spirits of your sex
With humbler aims their thoughts perplex,
And boast if by their arts they can
Contrive to make one happy man;
Whilst, moved by an impartial sense,
Favors like nature you dispense
With universal influence.

Page 232
Serenade
see LYRICS.
Sermon
see DIDACTICS, LITURGICS.
Sestain
see SESTET.
Sestet
A stanza or poem consisting of six lines in any meter, rhymed or
unrhymed. The ITALIAN SESTer iS written in iambic pentameter measures,
and it rhymes abcabc. The sIcILiAN sester is the same, but it rhymes
ababab. The HEROIC Sester, also written in iambic pentameter measures,
rhymes ababcc or abbacc. For an example of a poem written in
sestets, see Chidiock Tichborne's "Elegy: On the Evening of His
Execution," quoted earlier in these pages. For contemporary
examples, see Strong Measures (op. cit.). See also the STAVE.
The sextilla, a Spanish form, is an octosyllabic sestet rhyming either
aabccb or ababcc. The following poem is a heptasyllabic sextilla
written in rocking metersscanning it will not reveal whether its
measures are headless iambs or tailless trochees. The scene it
describes is a long building with a stanchion at each end in which rope
is being manufactured. The spinners walk backwards, round and
round, braiding the great ropes used by the sailing ships of bygone
ages; rope is the central image of each stanza:
The Ropewalk
In that building, long and low,
With its windows all a-row,

Page 233
As the spinners to the end
Downward go and reascend,
Gleam the long threads in the sun;
While within this brain of mine
Cobwebs brighter and more fine
By the busy wheel are spun.
Two fair maidens in a swing,
Like white doves upon the wing,
First before my vision pass;
Laughing, as their gentle hands,
Closely clasp the twisted strands,
At their shadow on the grass.
Then a booth of mountebanks,
With its smell of tan and planks,
And a girl poised high in air
On a cord, in spangled dress,
With a faded loveliness,
And a weary look of care.
Then a homestead among farms,
And a woman with bare arms
Drawing water from a well;
As the bucket mounts apace,
With it mounts her own fair face,
As at some magician's spell.
Then an old man in a tower,
Ringing loud the noontide hour,
While the rope coils round and round
Like a serpent at his feet,
And again, in swift retreat,
Nearly lifts him from the ground.
Then within a prison-yard,
Faces fixed, and stern, and hard,

Page 234
Then a school-boy, with his kite
Gleaming in a sky of light,
And an eager, upward look;
Steeds pursued through lane and field;
Fowlers with their snares concealed;
And an angler by a brook.
Ships rejoicing in the breeze,
Wrecks that float o'er unknown seas,
Anchors dragged through faithless sand;
Sea-fog drifting overhead,
And, with lessening line and lead,
Sailors feeling for the land.
All these scenes do I behold,
These, and many left untold,
In that building long and low;
While the wheel goes round and round,
With a drowsy, dreamy sound,
And the spinners backward go.
HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW
A sestet that utilizes the вов (see Bob AND wHeEL) is the Scottish BURNS STANZA
OF STANDARD HABBIE (SEE RIME COUÉE).
For various uses and relatives of these forms see the SICILIAN OCTAVE, OTTAVA
RIMA, ITALIAN SONNET, and SONETTO RISPETTO.
Sestina
French. Syllabic or, in English meters, accentual-syllabic. Thirty-nine
(39) lines divided into six sesters and one Triple, called the envoi. The
poem is ordinarily unrhymed. Instead of rhymes, the six end-words of
the lines in stanza one are picked up and re-used, in a particular
order, as end-words in the remaining stanzas. In the envoy, which
ends the poem, the six end-words are also picked up: one end-word is

Page 235
The order in which the end-words are re-used is prescribed by a set
pattern lying in the numerological sequence 615243. If this set of
numbers is applied to each stanza's set of end-words, it will be seen
that these words appear in the succeeding stanza in this order. In other
words, if the end-words of stanza one are designated ABCDEF,
applying the set of numbers will give us stanza two, FAEBDC. Doing
the same to stanza two results in the following:
stanza 2
F.
A
E.
B-
numbers
equals stanza 3
C
F
D
A
B
E
The numerological significance of the set, however, has evidently
been lost since the Middle Ages, though the form is perhaps the most
popular of the French Provençal forms in the twentieth century
(though the vilLaneLLe runs it a close second). Here is the schematic
diagram:
repeated
lines end-words

A
D
A
E
E
F
A
D

Page 236
lines
repeated
end-words
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
D
E
A
F
B
B
D
F
E
C
A
D
F
E
A
envoy
Not content with the considerable difficulty of writing the sestina as
prescribed, Swinburne made the following verse rhyme and meter as
well, thus turning its stanzas into Sicilian sestets:
Sestina
I saw my soul at rest upon a day

As a bird sleeping in the nest of night,
Among soft leaves that give the starlight way
To touch its wings but not its eyes with light;
So that it knew as one in visions may,
And knew not as men waking, of delight.
This was the measure of my soul's delight;
It had no power of joy to fly by day,
Nor part in the large lordship of the light;
But in a secret moon-beholden way
Had all its will of dreams and pleasant night,
And all the love and life that sleepers may.
But such life's triumph as men waking may
It might not have to feed its faint delight
Between the stars by night and sun by day,
Shut up with green leaves and a little light;
Because its way was as a lost star's way,
A world's not wholly known of day or night.
All loves and dreams and sounds and gleams of night
Made it all music that such minstrels may,

Page 237
And all they had they gave it of delight;
But in the full face of the fire of day
What place shall be for any starry light,
What part of heaven in all the wide sun's way?
Yet the soul woke not, sleeping by the way,
Watched as a nursling of the large eyed night,
And sought no strength nor knowledge of the day,
Nor closer touch conclusive of delight,
Nor mightier joy nor truer than dreamers may,
Nor more of song than they, nor more of light.
For who sleeps once and sees the secret light
Whereby sleep shows the soul a fairer way
Between the rise and rest of day and night,
Shall care no more to fare as all men may,
But be his place of pain or of delight,
There shall he dwell, beholding night as day.
Song, have thy day and take thy fill of light
Before the night be fallen across thy way;
Sing while he may, man hath no long delight.
ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE
New CollAge Magazine, Vol. 14, No. 1, 1982, edited by A. McA.
Miller, was a special "Sestina and Lines Issue," the lines having
mainly to do with discussing the sestina. In this issue, Wesli Court
published a sestina containing one or two features that, as in the
Swinburne example above, are not traditional. First, the obsessive
refrain, which is the first line, contains all six of the end-words, but
each time the line is repeated the syntax is transposed by hypallage.
Nonetheless, the line always makes sense, and it reappears a seventh
time as a one-line envoy rather than as the normal three-liner, but with
the sense of the original first line reversed:
The Obsession

Page 238
His world of waking flickered out and died
an image on a screen. He is the father
now of fitful dreams that last and last.
I dreamed again my father died at last.
He stood before me in his flesh again.
I greeted him. I said, "How are you, father?"
But he looked frailer than last time I'd dreamed
we were together, older than when he'd died
I saw upon his face the look of night.
I dreamed my father died again last night.
He stood before a mirror. He looked his last
into the glass and kissed it. He saw he'd died.
I put my arms about him once again
to help support him as he fell. I dreamed
I held the final heartburst of my father.
I died again last night: I dreamed my father
kissed himself in glass, kissed me goodnight
in doing so. But what was it I dreamed
in fact? An injury that seems to last
without abatement, opening again
and yet again in dream? Who was it died
again last night? I dreamed my father died,
but it was not heit was not my father,
only an image flickering again
upon the screen of dream out of the night.
How long can this cold image of him last?
Whose is it, his or mine? Who dreams he dreamed?
My father died. Again last night I dreamed
I felt his struggling heart still as he died
beneath my failing hands. And when at last
he weighed me down, then I laid down my father,
covered him with silence and with night.

Page 239
For an example of a double sestina cast as an eclogue, see Philip
Sidney's "Sestina" in Poetry; for a discussion by several teaching
poets of a student's sestina, see Daniel Van Riper's "Fear and a Rose"
in Poets Teaching; for contemporary sestinas and variants by various
hands, see Strong Measures.
Sexain, Sextilla
see SESTET.
Shakespearian Sonnet
see ENGLISH SONNET, SONNET.
Short Couplet
see COUPLET.
Short Hymnal Octave, Short Hymnal Stanza, Short Measure, Short
Octave, Short Particular Measure
see COMMON MEASURE.
Sicilian Octave
see OCTAVE.
Sicilian Quatrain
see QUATRAIN.
Sicilian Quintet
see QUINTET.
Sicilian Septet
see SEPTET.
Sicilian Sestet

see SESTET.
Sicilian Sonnet
A Sicilian ocrave (iambic pentameter lines rhyming abababab) plus a
Sicilian sester with change of rhymes (cdcdcd) or an Italian SESTET
(cdecde). See also the VOLTA.
Sicilian Tercet
see TERCET.
Sicilian Triplet
see TRIPLET.
Sirima
see CANZONE.
Sirvente
see LYRICS, SATIRICS.
Skeltonics
see podics, SATIRICS.
Sneadhbhairdne (sna-vúy-erd-ne)
Irish. Syllabic. A quatrain stanza of alternating octosyllabic and
tetrasyllabic lines ending in disyllable words. Lines two

Page 240
(2) and four (4) rhyme; line three (3) consonates with them. Every
stressed word in line four (4) must rhyme. Alliteration occurs as in
RIONNAIRD TRI-NARD. The poem, not the stanza, ends with the same first
syllable, word, or line with which it begins:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1.xxxxxx(xа)
2. xx (xb)
3.XXXXXX (bC)
4. bb (xb)
Soliloquy
see DRAMATICS.
Somonka
Japanese. Syllabic. The somonka is an epistolary love poem made up
of two tankas (syllable counts: 5-7-5-7-7) and written by two authors.
The first is a statement of love, the second a response. Though the
following poem was not written by two authors, it is in the form of a
somonka:
Epistles
I am writing you
from a pit. It is quite dark
here. I see little.
I am scratching this note on a stone.
Where are you? It has been long.

Page 241
Sonnet
Accentual-syllabic. Roughly speaking, any fourteen-line poem written
in rhymed, iambic pentameter verse. There are, however, two basic
traditional patterns of the sonnet.
The Petrarchan or ITALIAN SONNET is divided into an OCTAvE and a SESTET. The
octave's rhyme is abbaabba (see ITALIAN OCTAVE); the sestet's rhyme
varies, but it is generally either cdecde (ITALIAN SESTET) or cdcdcd (SICILIAN
SESTET). A turn or volta traditionally occurs after the octavea shift in
thought that is pursued and closed in the sestet. "God's Grandeur" by
Gerard Manley Hopkins, to be found in the early pages of this book, is
an Italian sonnet in form though not in meter.
The Shakespearian or ENgLIsH sonneT is divided into three SICILIAN QUATRAINS
rhyming abab cdcd efef and one HEROIC couPlergg. A turn takes place
after the third quatrain and before the couplet, which is generally a
climactic parallel.
There are innumerable other kinds of sonnets besides these two,
however, and new varieties occur weekly, almost daily. The SPENSERIAN
SONNET is a chain of three interlocking sIcILIAN QuAtrAIns, the second and
third of which pick up their first-line rhymes from the last-line rhymes
of the first and second quatrains, respectively, plus a HEROIC COUPLET: abab
bobc cdcd ee. The ENVELOPE SONNET rhymes abbacddo efgefg or efefef. For
other sonnet forms, see the BLUES SONNET, BREE DOUBLE, SICILIAN SONNET, SONETTO
RISPETTO, and TERZA RIMA SONNET. There are numerous examples of the sonnet
in many collections and most anthologies, including those cited here.
The CURTAL SoNNeT, an invention of Hopkins, is an elevenline form
rhyming abcabcdbcdc. The first ten lines are iambic pentameter, but
the last line is a single spondee. According to Dacey and Jauss, "the
form is a truncated version of an Italian sonnetits 'octave' being six

Page 242
The HEROIC SONNET is an eighteen-line form that adds a heroic couplet to
two stanzas of any kind of iambic pentameter ocTAvE of to four QUATRAINS.
The TAILED Of CAUDATED SoNNeT adds two, three-foot tails and two heroic
couplets to the Italian sonnet and rhymes abbaabba cdecde e3fff3gg;
thus, it is twenty lines long.
The SoNNET REDouBLED is a chain of fifteen sonnets. Each of the fourteen
lines in the first sonnet (the texte) becomes, in order, the final line in
the following fourteen sonnets. A variation of this pattern makes each
of the lines in the texte the first line in the following fourteen sonnets.
For other forms that use a texte, see the caroL, the gLose, and the RONDEAU
REDOUBLED.
The crown oF SonneTs is a sequence of seven Italian sonnets. The last line
of each of the first six sonnets becomes the first line in each of the
ensuing sonnets; the last line of the seventh sonnet is the first line of
the first sonnet. Since the seven sonnets are considered to be one
poem, no rhyme word can be re-used except in the formally repeated
lines, and new rhymes when they appear can not be those used
elsewhere in the poem.
Spatials
The important thing in this subgenre or prosody (depending on one's
point-of-view) is how the poem looks on paper. Thus, the
typographical level is of great import when we consider SPATIALs OF
spatial prosody. There are two kinds of spatials: the cALLIGRaMMe (shaped
stanza, hieroglyphic verse) and the CONCRETE POEM.
The calligramme is, except for the shape of the stanza, an ordinary
poem. It can utilize negative or positive shaping. According to Walter
H. Kerr, author of "The View from Khufu's Tongue" in Poetry (op.
cit.), "Positive shaping utilizes the words and negative shaping, the

Page 243
the shape of a pyramid in the center of the block. Here is an example
of a calligramme:
The Pillar of Fame
Fame's a pillar here, at last, we set,
Out-during marble, brass, or jet,
Charmed and enchanted so
As to withstand the blow
Of violent overthrow
Nor shall the seas,
Or outrages
Of storms, overbear
What we uprear,
Tho kingdoms fall,
This pillar never shall
Decline or waste at all;
But stand for ever by his own
Firm and well-fixed foundation.
ROBERT HERRICK
CoNcreTe poetry is ideogrammic spatials. For instance, in Japanese the
characters for "rain" might be arranged on the page so that they look
like rain falling. At the bottom of the picture, there might be the
character for "house"; thus, the characters for rain are falling
pictorially on the character for house. In an alphabetical language
such as English, concrete verse is more difficult to write and not so
immediately effective, as a rule, though Richard Kostelanetz managed
to make the word "Nymphomania" completely effective in Chapter 5
of Poetry (op. cit.). The latter volume contains many other examples
of both calligrammes and concrete poems, including Richard Frost's
"Climbing the Tower at Pisa."
Spenserian Stanza

Page 244
is always the last (ninth) line of the stanza. There is no set pattern for
the rhymes. Here is the first stanza of Alfred Tennyson's "The Lotos-
Eaters":
"Courage!" he said, and pointed toward the land,
"This mounting wave will roll us shoreward soon."
In the afternoon they came unto a land
In which it seemed always afternoon.
All round the coast the languid air did swoon,
Breathing like one that hath a weary dream.
Full-faced above the valley stood the moon;
And like a downward smoke, the slender stream
Xióng thě cíết tõ fámănd páuse and fáll did scem.
For another use of the alexandrine, see PouLTER's MEAsUrE. For a form of
Spenserian stanza with a set rhyme scheme, see the HUTTAIN.
Split Couplet
see COUPLET.
Standard Habbie
see RIME COUÉE.
Stave
English. Accentual-syllabic. Loosely, the stanza of a hymn or of a
drinking song, both of which often utilize refrains. Usually, lines are
tetrameter or shorter. The term can be applied more specifically to a
SEsTer stanza made of three couplets and ending in a refrain: aabbcC,
ddeecC, etc.
In a stricter version, both the first and last lines of each stave are the
refrain. Thus, only the rhyme of the central couplet changes from
stanza to stanza:
linesrhymes and
refrains

1. A
2. a
3. b
4.b
5. a
6. A
7. A
8. a
9. C
10. c
11. a
12. A

Page 245
For an example of this kind of stave, see "Western Wind" in the
section on the gLose. The strict stave is a variation of the COUPLET ENVELOPE:
two couplets rhyming a enclosing another rhyming couplet: aabbaa.
Here is a simple stave that uses incremental repetition in a couplet
refrain:
Corinna Singing
When to her lute Corinna sings,
Her voice revives the leaden strings
And doth in highest notes appear
As any challenged echo clear;
But when she doth of mourning speak,
Even with her sighs the strings do break.
And as her lute doth live or die,
Led by her passion, so must 1,
For when of pleasure she doth sing,
My thoughts enjoy a sudden spring,
But if she doth of sorrow speak,
Even from my heart the strings do break.
THOMAS CAMPION
For other couplet forms, see COUPLET, DIDACTICS, FREE VERSE, CYWYDD LLOSGYRNOG,
GWAWDODYN, HIR A THODDAID, RIME COUÉE, SESTET, And SHORT PARTICULAR MEASURE. See also,
ENVELOPE STANZA.
Strambotto
see OCTAVE.
Tanka
A Japanese form. Syllabic. The tanka is a single qunter whose lines
consist of five, seven, five, seven, and seven syllables, respectively. It
is unrhymed:

lines syllables
1.xxxxX
2. XXXXXX
3. xXXXX

Page 246
lines syllables
4. xXXXXX
5. XXXXXX
X
Note that the tanka is, in effect, a HAIKu (see TErCer) with two added lines
of seven syllables each. For this reason, a separation is sometimes
made between the third and fourth lines, making it a poem with one
TRIPLET and One coUPLeT. The first three lines are an independent unit that
ends in a noun or a verb and after which a turn takes place: 5-7-5, 7-7.
The tanka has two forms (like the Haku and the sENRYU). In the second
tanka form, called the waka, one subject is treated in the first two lines,
another in the next two, and the last line is a refrain, paraphrase, or
restatement: (57), (57, 7); the first two lines are a dependent clause or
a phrase, the last three an independent clause, as the parentheses
indicate. For an example of the tanka and the waka, as well as of other
Japanese forms, see the poem titled "Paradigm" earlier in these pages.
A reNga is a single tanka written by two authors. The first writes the
triplet, the second writes the couplet response. A RENGA CHAIN is a poem
made of a sequence of rengas and composed by a number of authors.
The first triplet sets the subject, the succeeding couplet and all ensuing
triplets and couplets amplify, gloss, or comment upon the first triplet.
Renga chains can become extremely complex in many ways. For
instance, a first triplet is written, and a couplet is added, completing
the renga. Another triplet is added that follows logically, but that can
also be logically read in place of the first triplet. A couplet is added,
completing the second renga. A third triplet is added that can logically

Page 247
See alsO CHOKA, HAIKU, KATAUTA, MONDO, SEDOKA, aNd SOMONKA.
Telestich
An AcrosTic made of final letters rather than initial letters.
Tercet
Can be written in any of the meters. Any complete poem of three
lines, rhymed or unrhymed. The ENCLOSED TERCET rhymes aba (see ENCLOSED
TRIPLET). The SiCILIAN Tercer is an enclosed tercet written in iambic
pentameter measures (see SIcILIAN TRIPLET). See Strong Measures (op. cit.)
for examples.
The TRIAD is a loose Irish form. It is a consideration of three things and
their effect upon a person. See "The Rule of Three" earlier in these
pages.
Terzanelle
see VILLANELLE.
Terza Rima
Italian. Accentual-syllabic, usually iambic pentameter. Any number of
interlocking, enclosed TRIPLET STANZAs. The first and third lines of a stanza
rhyme; the second line rhymes with the first and third lines of the
following stanza. In other words, the ending of the second line of any
stanza becomes the rhyme for the following stanza: aba bcb cdc, etc.
The poem usually ends in a coupLer rhymed from the second line of the
last triplet: yzy zz. The TERZA RIMA SoNNET is a fourteenline QuatorzaIN in
iambic pentameter, rhyming aba bob cdc ded ee. Capitolo is satirical
terza rima.
For examples of terza rima, see Sylvia Plath's "Medallion," Robert
Pack's "The Boat," Van K. Brock's "The Sea Birds," and Donald

Page 240
Tetrastich
see QUATRAIN.
Threnode, Threnady
see CORONACH, DIRGE, LYRICS, MONODY.
Thrime
see TRIPLET.
Toddaid (todd-eyed)
Welsh. Syllabic. QuatraIn stanzas alternate between ten-syllable and
nine-syllable lines. A syllable toward the end of the first line cross-
rhymes into the middle of the second, and the same effect is
reproduced in lines three (3) and four (4) Lines two (2) and four (4).
rhyme with each other:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1. xxxxxxaxx
2.xxxxахxxь
3. xxXXXX×ХС
4.xXXCXXXXb
Tragedy
see DRAMATICS.

Tragicomedy
see DRAMATICS.
Triad
see TERCET.
Triolet
A French form. Syllabic (in English prosody, accentual-syllabic). A
poem consisting of a single octavE turning on two rhymes. It is built on
two refrains: line one (1) reappears as line four (4) and again as line
seven (7); line two (2) reappears as line eight (8), completing the
poem. The triolet rhymes ABaAabAB. Sometimes a separation is made
between lines five (5) and six (6), making it a poem of two stanzas, a
QuINTEr and a TrIPLeT. Lines can be of any single length:
linesrefrains and
rhymes
1. Arefrain
2. Brefrain

Page 249
linesrefrains and
rhymes
3. a
4. Arefrain
5. a
6. b
7. Arefrain
8. Bretrain
Jasper Olson
(from Bordello)
I take my women any way they come
I'm Jasper Olson, brother, hard and fast
I play this game. Though some folks think I'm dumb,
I take my women any way they come,
and come they do. There's no time to be numb
in this lifegrab it now and ram the past.
I take my women any way they come.
I'm Jasper Olson, brother, hard and fast.
L. T.
For other contemporary examples of the form, see Strong Measures
(op. cit.): Barbara Howes' "Early Supper," Sandra McPherson's
"Triolet," and Harold Witt's "First Photo of Flu Virus."
Triplet
A STANza consisting of three lines. It can be written in any meter and

can be rhymed or unrhymed. The ENCLOSED TRIPLeT rhymes aba. The SICILIAN
TRIPLET is an enclosed triplet in iambic pentameter measures. For
examples, see Strong Measures (op. cit.).
There are two Welsh englyns that are triplet stanza forms; both are
syllabic. ENgLyn mILwr (én-glin mée-loor) turns on one rhyme or
consonance, and each line has a count of seven syllables. The rhymes
change for each stanza:

Page 250
The Head of Urien
I carry a severed head.
Cynfarch's son, its owner, would
Charge two warbands without heed.
I bear a great warrior's skull.
Many did good Urien rule;
On his bright breast, a dark gull.
I bear a head at my heart,
Urien's head, who ruled a court;
On his bright breast the crows dart.
I bear a head in my hand.
A shepherd in Yrechwydd-land,
Spear-breaker, kingly and grand.
I bear a head at my thigh,
Shield of the land, battle-scythe,
Column of war, falcon-cry.
I bear a head sinister.
His life great, his grave bitter,
The old warrior's savior.
I bear a head from the hills.
His hosts are lost in the vales.
Lavish it with cries and hails.
I bear a head on my shield.
I stood my ground in the field
Near at handhe would not yield.
I bear a head on my greaves.
After battlecry he gives
Brennych's land its laden graves.
I bear a head in my hand,

Page 251
I bear a head from the wood,
Upon its mouth frothing blood
And, hereafter, on Rheged!
My breast quaked and my arm shook,
My heart was stone, and it broke.
I bear the head that I took.
LLYWARCH HEN
ENGLYN PeNFyr (én-glin pén vir) is a stanza whose lines consist,
respectively, of ten (10), seven (7), and seven (7) syllables, rhyming
AAA. One, two, or three syllables occur at the end of the first line
after the main rhyme. These syllables are echoed by assonance,
alliteration, or secondary rhyme in the first few syllables of the second
line. The main rhyme ends the second and third lines:
linessyllables and
rhymes
1.XXXXXXXXА
b
2.bxxxxxA
3. XXXXXXA
The Corpse of Urien
The handsome corpse is laid down today,
Laid under this earth and stone
Curse my fist! Owain's sire slain!
The handsome corpse is now broken
In the earth, under the oak
Curse my fist! My kinsman struck!

Page 252
The handsome corpse is here locked away,
Made to rest beneath the rock
Curse my fist! How the Weirds knock!
The handsome corpse is settled in earth
Beneath vervain and nettle
Curse my fist! Hear fate rattle!
The handsome corpse is laid down today,
Laid under this earth and stone
Curse my fist! This fate was mine!
LLYWARCH HEN
For set forms and uses of the triplet or enclosed triplet, see also the
sections on the TERCET, TERZA RIMA, TERZANELLE, TRIVERSEN, aNd VILLANELLE.
Triumphal Ode
A poem written in celebration of a victory. See OCCASIONALS, ODE.
Triversen
A native American form of variable accentuals is the TRIVERSEN STANZA,
which was developed by William Carlos Williams and a number of
others. Essentially, a triversen (triple verse sentence) stanza is partly
grammatic in its prosody. One stanza equals one sentence. This
sentence is broken into three parts, each part becoming a line
composed of approximately one phrase. Thus, three lines (three
phrases) equal one stanza (one sentence or clause). Williams, in
attempting to explain this prosody, spoke of the "breath
pause"meaning only the process of breaking the sentence or clause
into phrasal lines (see line-phrasing). He also spoke of the "variable
foot"the accentual element of the prosody: each line could vary in
length, carrying from two to four stressed (but not necessarily
alliterated) syllables. Here is the scheme of the first sentence of the
following poem:

Page 253
lines
I.
3-
words, accents, syllables, sentences
xxxxxxxx
xxxx
*x ;
xxx
Seed Moon
(from "Twelve Moons")
In the night there was a crescent
thin as a breath
floating in the sky.
Now the sun has quickened,
it sprays the green meadows
with drops of light.
Birds pierce the trees
along the lake where grass
thrusts through the bluff.
In the houses of the village
there is the scent of savors
the women move and the men rise.
Soon the earth will fill with voices,
the sounds of loam turning;
the sun will stretch to fill the sky,
and in the woodland the deer
will sample the air,
lift their heads to listen.
L. T.
The triversen proper (as distinguished from the stanza) is eighteen
(18) lines long, as in "Seed Moon."

Page 254
Troilus Stanza
see RIME ROYAL.
Tumbling Verse
see SKELTONICS.
Twime
see COUPLET.
Venus and Adonis Stanza
see HEROIC SESTET.
Villanelle
A French form. Syllabic (in English meters, accentual-syllabic). Lines
can be of any single length. Nineteen lines divided into six stanzasfive
TrIplets and one quatrainturning on two rhymes and built on two refrains.
The refrains consist of lines one (1) and three (3), complete. Line one
(1) reappears as lines six (6), twelve (12), and eighteen (18); line three
(3) reappears as lines nine (9), fifteen (15), and nineteen (19),
finishing the poem:
lines refrains and rhymes
1. Alrefrain
2. b
3. Azrefrain
4. a
5. b
6. Alrefrain

7. a
8. b
9. Azrefrain
10. a
11. b
12. Alretrain
13. a
14. b
15. Azrefrain
16. a
17. b
18. A1
19. A2
There are several truly famous twentieth-century villanelles; "The
House on the Hill" by Edwin Arlington Robinson, "Do Not Go Gentle
into That Good Night" by Dylan Thomas, and "The Waking" by
Theodore Roethke are perhaps the best known. The latter is included
in Strong Measures (op. cit.), together with a dozen others by various
contemporaries including Elizabeth Bishop, Marilyn Hacker, Richard
Hugo, Donald Justice, Weldon Kees, and David Wagoner.
The terzanelLe is of French and Italian derivationan adaptation of TERzA
RiMA to the villanelle form. It is nineteen

Page 255
lines long, composed of five interlocking TrIpLets and a final QUATRAIN.
Lines one (1) and three (3) reappear as refrains in the final quatrain. In
addition, the middle line of each triplet is a repeton that reappears as
the final line of the succeeding triplet, except the middle line of the
last triplet, which reappears in the quatrain. The poem can end in one
of two ways, as shown in the diagram:
lines
rhymes, repetons, and
refrains
1. Alrefrain
2. Brepeton
3. Azrefrain
4. b
5. Crepeton
6. Brepeton
7. C
8. Drepeton
9. Crepeton
10. d
11. Erepeton
12. Drepeton
13. e
14. Frepeton
15. Erepeton

16. f
17. Alrefrain or Frepeton
18. Frepeton or Alrefrain
19. A2
Azrefrain
Terzanelle in Thunderweather
This is the moment when shadows gather
under the elms, the cornices and eaves.
This is the center of thunderweather.
The birds are quiet among these white leaves
where wind stutters, starts, then moves steadily
under the elms, the cornices, and eaves
these are our voices speaking guardedly
about the sky, of the sheets of lightning
where wind stutters, starts, then moves steadily
into our lungs, across our lips, tightening
our throats. Our eyes are speaking in the dark
about the sky, of the sheets of lightning

Page 256
that illuminate moments. In the stark
shades we inhabit, there are no words for
our throats. Our eyes are speaking in the dark
of things we cannot say, cannot ignore.
This is the moment when shadows gather,
shades we inhabit. There are no words, for
this is the center of thunderweather.
L. T.
For another form that utilizes the repeton, see the panoum. Other
interlocking forms are the RuBAIYaT and the SPENSERIAN SONNET.
Virelai
see LAI.
Waka
see TANKA.
Wheel
see BOB AND WHEEL.

Page 257
APPENDIX:
ANALYTICAL OUTLINE
Here is an outline of the topics covered in The New Book of Forms:
I. TYPOGRAPHICAL LEVEL.
A. Mode.
1. Prose.
2. Verse.
B. Proportion in Figure.
1. Strophe.
2. Stanza.
II. SONIC LEVEL.
A. General prosody.
1. Accentual.
a. Podic
2. Syllabic.
3. Accentual-syllabic.
4. Isoverbal (wordcount).
5. Grammatic parallelism.
6. Syllabic-accentual.
7. Invented prosodies.

a. Moraics
B. Specific prosody (i.e., "Normative accentual-syllabic").
1. Normative.
2. Quantitative.
3. Variable.
C. Meter (if applicable; i.e., iambic pentameter, tetrapodic,
octosyllabic, etc.).
D. Proportion in measure (differing line lengths, if applicable).
E. Proportion in rhyme (rhyme scheme, if applicable, including
refrains).
F. Metrical variations (if applicable).
G. General form (ode, elegy, lyric) and specific form (sonnet,
villanelle, nonce).
H. Other sonic devices (consonance, assonance, alliteration, etc.).
II. SENSORY LEVEL.
A. Tropes.
1. Descriptions.
2. Similes.
3. Metaphors.
4. Rhetorical tropes.

Page 258
B. Usages and traditions of figures.
1. Metaphysical.
2. Symbolist.
3. Imagist.
4. Surrealist.
5. Etc.
C. Emotional thrust.
1. Atmosphere.
2. Mood.
IV. IDEATIONAL LEVEL.
A. Subject (one word or phrase).
B. Schemas.
1. Orthographical.
2. Constructional.
3. Repetitional.
4. Substitutive.
5. Inclusive.
6. Exclusive.
C. Viewpoint.
1. Egopoetic.
2. Narrative.

3. Dramatic.
D. Syntax.
1. Subjective (egopoetic).
2. Objective (narrative).
3. Dramatic.
4. Abstract.
E. Level(s) of Diction.
F. Style (high, mean, base).
G. Theme (complete sentence).
V. FUSION.
A. Major genre.
1. Lyric.
2. Narrative.
3. Dramatic.
B. Minor genre (if applicable).
1. Bucolic.
2. Didactic.
3. Liturgic.
4. Satiric.
5. Etc.
C. Level(s) emphasized or balance of levels.
D. Proportion in treatment (means supportive of ends).

Page 259
INDEX OF AUTHORS AND TITLES
A
"Acrostic Love Poem to Elizabeth Fitch," 90
Aiken, Conrad (1889-1973), 193
Aldrich, Thomas Bailey (1836-1907), 200;
"Palinode," 200
Alighieri, Dante (1265-1321), 76;
Divine Comedy, The, 76
Alsop, George (1638?-1680?), 90;
"To My Cousin, Mistress Ellinor Evins," 90
Amergin (c. 500s?), 175, 185, 225;
"Mystery, The," 175, 185, 225
American Poets from the Puritans to the Present, 67
"Amherst Haiku, An," 162
"Anacrontick Verse," 126, 176
Anderson, Jon (1940- ), 212;
"Blue Animals, The," 212
And So the Irish Built a Church, 193
Anonymous:
"Bard's Lament, The," (medieval Gaelic), 209-10;

Beowult, 5;
"Butcher, A" (1970s), 171;
"Cuckoo Song, The" (medieval English), 167-68;
"Death of Conain, The" (medieval Gaelic), 132;
"Evil It Is" (medieval Gaelic), 117;
"Gaelic Stanzas I" (medieval Gaelic), 228-29;
Gawain and the Green Knight (1470s?), 102, 103;
"Gnomic Verses" (medieval English), 150;
"Hornblower" (1960s), 170-71;
"Huntsong for a Small Son" (medieval Welsh), 107, 126;
"Jolly Rutterkin" (1500s), 178;
"Lady and the Swine, The" (1600s), 183;
"Lie-Awake Dirge, A" (1400s), 179-80;
"Lord Randal" (1400s), 44;
"Monk's Massacre, The" (1083), 147;
"Mourning of the Hare, The" (medieval English), 120-21;
"Obadiah" (1800s), 134;
"Old Mother Goose" (1700s), 21-22;
"Psalm 26" (Old Testament), 11-12;
"Robbery, A" (1950s), 170;
"Robin to Bobbin" (1600s), 44;
"Ruin, The" (900s?), 111-12;

"Rule of Three, The" (medieval English), 131, 247;
"Shepherd's Carol, The" (1300s), 109;
"Song of Solomon, The" (Old Testament), 9-11;
"Spring Song" (medieval Welsh), 95;
"Street Song" (1940s), 170;
"Three Mourning Songs and an Oath" (medieval English), 180-81;
"Three Riddles from the Anglo-Saxon" (700s), 135-36;
"Tom O'Bedlam's Song" (1600s?), 168-69;
"Two Epigrams" (medieval Gaelic), 214;
"Unquiet Grave, The" (1400s), 96-97;
"Western Wind" (medieval English), see Court, Wesli;
"Winter" (medieval Welsh), 42, 204-5;
"Winter Song, A" (medieval Gaelic), 211
"Another Letter to Lord Byron," 199
"Anyone Lived in a Pretty How Town," 68
Arte of English Poesie, The, 42
Articulate Energy, 64
Ashbery, John (1927-), 68, 201
B
"Bard's Lament, The," 209-10
Basho * (1644-1694), 160-61;
"Fourteen Haiku," 160-61

Page 260
Fifty Poems, London, 1942, 17-18
"Belle Dame Sans Merci, La," 182
"Bells for John Whiteside's Daughter," 23, 71
Benet, Stephen Vincent (1898-1943), 192, 193;
John Brown's Body, 192, 193
Benfras, Dafydd, 151;
"Grave, The," 151
Beowulf, 5, 22
Bertram, James, 216;
"Is It Well Lighted, Papa?" 216
"Beside My Grandmother," 214
Bible, 9-10
Bishop, Elizabeth (1911-1979), 254
"Black Root in Rainy Weather," 212
Blake, William (1757-1827), 22, 54, 97, 202-3, 206;
"Little Boy Lost," 97;
"To Old Nobodaddy," 202-3;
"Tyger, The," 54
Block, Ron (1955- ), 100
"Bloom Upon the Mountain," 67-68
"Blue Animals, The," 212

"Boat, The," 247
Bodman, Manoah (1765-1850), 171-72;
''''Canst Thou Draw?," 171-72
Book of Forms, The, 45
"Bop for Kiddies," 70
"Bordello," 100, 124, 249
"Bref Double à l'Écho," 105, 141
Bridges, Robert (1844-1930), 33;
Milton's Prosody, Oxford, 1893, 33-34
Brock, Van K. (1932-), 247;
"Sea Birds, The," 247
Browning, Robert (1812-1889), 140;
"Porphyria's Lover," 140
Bryant, William Cullen (1794-1878), 106, 179;
"Thanatopsis," 106, 179
Burns, Robert (1759-1796), 24-25, 119, 213;
"Red, Red Rose, A," 24-25, 34-35, 119;
"To a Mouse," 213
"Butcher, A," 171
Byron. See Gordon, George
C
Campion, Thomas (1567-1620), 245;

"Corinna Singing," 245
'"'Canst Thou Draw?,'' 171-72
Canterbury Tales, The, 76
Cantos, The, 193
Carroll, Lewis [Charles Lutwidge Dodgson] (1832-1898), 47-48, 183;
"Jabberwocky," 183
"Cartoon Show," 229
Cartwright, William (1611-1643), 140, 174-75;
"Dream, The," 140;
"House Blessing, A," 174-75
"[Catullus]," 93
"Chant Royal," 116
Chatterton, Thomas (1752-1770), 184-85;
"Song from Aella," 184-85
Chaucer, Geoffrey (1340?-1400), 36, 76, 99, 152, 168, 185-87, 203,
213;
Canterbury Tales, The, 76;
"Complaint to His Purse," 99, 152, 213;
"Merciless Beauty," 186-87
"Chicago," 64
Clark, J. P., trans., 22;
Beowulf, 22
"Climbing the Tower at Pisa," 243

"Coffin, the Cradle, and the Purse, The," 65
"Complaint to His Purse," 99, 213
Complete Works of the Gawain Poet, The, 103
"Confessional," 220
"Corinna Singing," 245
"Corpse of Urien, The," 251-52
Court, Wesli (1940-), 18-19, 42, 56, 72, 91, 102, 103-4, 105, 111,
149, 157-58, 170, 180-81, 196-97, 201, 203-4, 221, 228, 237-38;
"Bref Double à l'Écho," 105;
"Dawn Song," 203-4;
"Envoi in a Boneyard," 102;
"Eunuch Cat, The," 201;
"Eve's Daughter," 72;
"Hornpipepithalamium," 180-81;
"Love Curse," 91;
"Magi

Page 261
Carol, The," 103-4, 111;
"Man Hunter, The," 196-97;
"Morbid Man Singing, The," 18-19;
"Obsession, The," 237-38;
"Odds Bodkin's Springsong," 170;
"Odds Bodkin's Strange Thrusts and Ravels," 56-59, 228;
"Swift Replies, The," 221;
"Talisman, A," 149;
"Western Wind," 157-58, 245
Cowley, Abraham (1618-1667), 98
Crashaw, Richard (1612?-1649), 121-23;
"Song Out of the Italian," 121-23
"Crazy Jane and the Bishop," 48, 170
"Cuckoo Song, The," 167-68
cummings, e. e. (1894-1962), 62, 68, 139;
"Anyone Lived in a Pretty How Town," 68;
Santa Claus, 139
D
Dacey, Philip (1939- ), 213, 220, 241;
"Jack, Afterwards," 213;
"Rondel," 220

Dacey, Philip, and Jauss, David, eds., Strong Measures:
Contemporary American Poetry in Traditional Forms, 37, 97, 100,
111, 116, 123, 149, 158, 165, 195, 199, 201, 206, 212, 213, 215,
216, 220, 224, 226, 231, 232, 239, 241, 247, 249, 254
Dafydd ap Gwilym: Fifty Poems, 17-18
"Dainty Sum, A," 13
Dante. See Alighieri
Davie, Donald (1922-), 64-67;
Articulate Energy, 64
Davis, Charlie (1898- ), 193;
And So the Irish Built a Church, 193
Davison, Edward, 41;
Some Modern Poets, 41
"Dawn Song," 203-4
"Death of a Vermont Farm Woman," 216
"Death of Conain, The," 132
"Delight in Books from Evening," 125-26
"Description of an Author's Bedchamber," 163
"Dialogue," 230
Dickey, James (1923-), 63;
"Falling," 63
Dickinson, Emily (1830-1886), 13-14, 22, 65-68, 113-14, 162, 206;
"Amherst Haiku, An," 162;

"Bloom Upon the Mountain," 67-68;
"Dainty Sum, A," 13, 14;
"Dying," 66-67;
"First Snow," 13-14;
"I'm Nobody," 65;
"Naked Eye, The," 65-66;
"Poetry," 113-14, 207
"Dirge," 63, 70
"Dirty Dinky," 165
Divine Comedy, The, 76
Dodgson, Charles Lutwidge. See Carroll, Lewis
Donne, John (1572-1631), 55, 176;
"Sun Rising, The," 55, 176
"Do Not Go Gentle into That Good Night," 254
Doolittle, Hilda ["H. D."] (1886-1961), 193;
Helen in Egypt, 193
d'Orleans, Charles (1391-1465), 219, 220;
"Confessional," 220;
"Rondel," 219
"Dream, The," 140
Dryden, John (1631-1700), 163, 184, 223-24;
"Roundelay," 223-24

Dunbar, Paul Laurence (1872-1906), 216;
"We Wear the Mask," 216
"Dying," 66-67
E
"Early Supper," 249
"Effort at Speech," 226
"Eighth Air Force," 206
"Elegy:
On the Evening of His Execution," 64, 70, 232
"Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard," 106
Eliot, T. S. (1888-1965), 53, 138, 160;
Murder in the Cathedral, 138

Page 262
"Elixir, The," 119-20
Empson, William, 51, 72;
Seven Types of Ambiguity, New York, 1955, 51, 72
"Envoi in a Boneyard," 102
"Epistles," 240
"Epistle to Two Friends, An," 133-34
Essay an Criticism, 39
"Eunuch Cat, The," 201
"Eve's Daughter," 72
"Evil It Is," 117
F
Faery Queen, The, 192
"Falling," 63
"Fear and a Rose," 239
Fearing, Kenneth, 63, 70;
"Dirge," 63, 70
"First Photo of Flu Virus," 249
"First Snow," 13-14
"For Victor Jara," 149
"Fourteen Haiku," 160-61
"Friends," 149

Frost, Richard (1929- ), 243;
"Climbing the Tower at Pisa," 243
Frost, Robert (1874-1963), 23, 27-29, 139, 224;
Mask of Mercy, A, 139;
"Mending Wall," 23, 27-29;
"Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening," 224
G
"Gaelic Stanzas I," 228-29
Gall, Sally M., 11
Gardner, John (1933-1984), 103;
Complete Works of the Gawain Poet, The, 103
Gawain and the Green Knight, 102, 103
Gilbert, W. S. (1836-1911), 40;
Pirates of Penzance, The, 40;
"Song: Ruth," 40-41
Gildner, Gary (1938- ), 224;
"Meeting My Best Friend from the Eighth Grade," 224
"Gnomic Verses," 150
"God's Grandeur," 19-20, 241-42
Goldsmith, Oliver (1730-1774), 163;
"Description of an Author's Bedchamber," 163
Gordon, George [Lord Byron] (1788-1824), 185;

"She Walks in Beauty," 185
Gower, John (1330?-1408), 36
"Grave, The," 151
Gray, Thomas (1716-1771), 106;
"Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard," 106
Greene, Robert (1558?-1592), 182-83;
"Mulidor's Madrigal," 182-83
Gross, Harvey, 23;
Sound and Form in Modern Poetry, 23
Gwilym, Dafydd ap (1325?-1385?), 17
H
Hacker, Marilyn (1942- ), 216, 254;
"Rondeau After a Transatlantic Telephone Call," 216
Hartman, Charles O. (1949-), 226;
"Little Song, A," 226
Hawthorne, Nathaniel (1804-1864), 67;
House of the Seven Gables, The, 67
H. D. See Doolittle, Hilda
"Head of Urien, The," 250-51
Helen in Egypt, 193
Hen, Llywarch (500s?), 250-51, 251-52;
"Corpse of Urien, The," 251-52;

"Head of Urien, The," 250-51
Henryson, Robert (1430?-1506?), 142-45, 153;
"Robin and Maykn," 142-45, 153
Herbert, George (1593-1633), 119-20, 141;
"Elixir, The," 119-20;
"Paradise," 141
Herrick, Robert (1591-1674), 126, 153-54, 172-73, 176, 243;
"Anacrontick Verse," 126, 176;
"His Litany, to the Holy Spirt," 172-73;
"Pillar of Fame, The," 243;
"Upon Love, by Way of Question and Answer," 153-54

Page 263
"His Litany, to the Holy Spirit," 172-73
Hopkins, Gerard Manley (1844-1889), 19-20, 241;
"God's Grandeur," 19-20, 241
"Hornblower," 170-71
"Hornpipepithalamium," 180-81
"House Blessing, A," 174-75
House of the Seven Gables, The, 67
"House on the Hill, The," 254
"How Did It Seem to Sylvia?" 199
Howes, Barbara (1914-), 216, 249;
"Death of a Vermont Farm Woman," 216;
"Early Supper," 249
Hugo, Richard (1923-1982), 254
Hudson, Sam (1946?-), 177-78;
"Isle Is Full of Noises, The," 177-78
"Huntsong for a Small Son," 107, 126
"Hymn to the Morning, An," 176
I
"I'm Nobody," 65
'In a Station of the Metro," 63
"In Praise of Owain Gwynedd," 129-30

"In Summer," 118
"Is It Well-Lighted, Papa?" 216
"Isle Is Full of Noises, The," 177-78
J
"Jabberwocky," 183
"Jack, Afterwards," 213
Jarrell, Randall (1914-1965), 206;
"Eighth Air Force," 206
"Jason Potter," 218
"Jasper Olson," 249
Jauss, David. See Dacey, Philip
Jeffers, Robinson (1887-1962), 7
John Brown's Body, 192, 193
"Jolly Rutterkin," 178
Jonson, Ben (1572-1637), 197-98;
"Ode to Himself, An," 197-98
Jung, Carl Gustav, 53
Justice, Donald (1925- ), 33, 201, 254;
Of Prosody, 33-34
"Justice Now," 23, 227-28
Keats, John (1795-1821), 50, 52, 56, 182, 194, 195-96;

"Belle Dame Sans Merci, La," 182;
"Ode on a Grecian Urn," 50-51;
"Ode on Melancholy," 196;
"Ode to Autumn," 52, 56, 194, 196
Kees, Weldon (1914-1955), 254
Kennedy, X. J. (1929- ), 40, 220;
"Man in the Man-Made Moon, The," 40;
"Rondel," 220
Kerr, Walter H. (1900s), 242;
"View from Khufu's Tongue, The," 242
Kilmer, Joyce (1886-1918), 41, 52;
"Trees," 41, 52
"Kindly Unhitch that Star, Buddy," 42
Knight, Sarah Kemble (1666-1727), 174;
"Resentments," 174;
"Warning to Travelers," 174
Kostelanetz, Richard (1940- ), 243;
"Nymphomania," 243
L
"Lady and the Swine, The," 183
"Lafe Grat," 124
"Lament for Owain ab Urien," 127-28

Lang, Andrew (1844-1912), 219;
"Rondel of Charles d'Orleans," 219
Lear, Edward (1812-1888), 167;
"Old Man with a Beard," 167
Lee, AI (1938- ), 214;
"Beside My Grandmother," 214
levy, d. a. (1942-1968), 70;
"Bop for Kiddies," 70
"Lie-Awake Dirge, A," 179-80
"Little Boy Lost," 97
"Little Song, A," 226
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth (1807-1882), 232-34;
"Ropewalk, The," 232-34
"Look Closely," 70
"Lord Randal," 44
"Lotos-Eaters, The," 244
"Love Curse," 91
Lux, Thomas, 201

Page 264
M
McAllister, Claire (1936- ), 201;
"Pantoum for Morning, A," 201
McPherson, Sandra (1943- ), 249;
"Triolet," 249
"Magi Carol, The," 94, 103-4, 111
"Man Hunter, The," 196-97
"Man in the Man-Made Moon, The," 40
Marcus, Morton (1938- ), 70;
"Look Closely," 70;
Where the Oceans Cover Us, 70
Marvell, Andrew (1564-1593), 178;
"To His Coy Mistress," 178
Mask of Mercy, A, 139
Mawr, Cynddelw Brydydd (1100s), 129-30;
"In Praise of Owain Gwynedd," 129-30;
"To a Girl," 129
"Medallion," 247
"Meeting My Best Friend from the Eighth Grade," 224
Meinke, Peter, 201
"Mending Wall," 23, 27-29

"Merciless Beauty," 186-87
Meredith, William (1919-), 226;
"Effort at Speech," 226
Miller, А. МсА., ea., 237;
New CollAge, 237
"Milton," 92
Milton, John (1608-1674), 92, 192, 194;
"On the Morning of Christ's Nativity," 194;
Paradise Lost, 192
Milton's Prosody, 33-34
"Monk's Massacre, The," 147
Moore, Richard (1927- ), 149;
"Friends," 149
"Morbid Man Singing, The," 18-19
Morgan, Robert, 116;
"Chant Royal," 116
"Mourning of the Hare, The," 120-21
"Mulidor's Madrigal," 182-83
Murder in the Cathedral, 138
"My Choice," 126-27
"Mystery, The," 94, 175, 225
N

"Naked Eye, The," 65-66
Nash, Ogden (1902-1971), 27, 42, 204;
"Kindly Unhitch that Star, Buddy," 42
New CollAge, 237
New Yorker Book of Poems, 63
"November 22, 1963," 63
"Nymphomania," 243
"Obadiah," 134
O'Brien, P. J. (1949- ), 229;
"Cartoon Show," 229
"Obsession, The," 237-38
"Odds Bodkin's Springsong," 170
"Odds Bodkin's Strange Thrusts and Ravels," 56-59, 228
"Ode: Intimations of Immortality," 37, 194, 198
"Ode on a Grecian Urn," 50-51
"Ode on Melancholy," 196
"Ode to Autumn," 194, 196
"Ode to Himself, An," 197-98
Of Prosody, 33-34
"Of the Spiritual Musick," 72, 73, 113
"Old Man with a Beard," 167

"Old Mother Goose," 21-22
"Old Professor, The," 137
"On a Sea-Storm Nigh the Coast," 124-25
"On Maids and Cats," 227
"On the Morning of Christ's Nativity," 194
"Original Sin: A Short Story," 206
Owain Gwynedd, Hywel ab (1100s), 118, 126-27;
"In Summer," 118;
"My Choice," 126-27
P
Pack, Robert (1929-), 247;
"Boat, The," 247
"Palinode," 200
"Pantoum for Morning, A," 201
"Paradigm," 116, 155-56, 162, 246
"Paradise," 141
Paradise Lost, 192
"Party Game," 32-33, 207
Pastorius, Francis Daniel (1651-1720), 125-26;
"Delight in Books from Evening," 125-26

Page 265
Paterson, 193
"Pillar of Fame, The," 243
Plath, Sylvia (1932-1963), 212, 247;
"Black Rock in Rainy Weather," 212;
"Medallion," 247
Pocoangelini: A Fantography and Other Poems, 71
"Pocoangelini 10," 207-9
"Poetry," 113-14, 207
Poetry: An Introduction Through Writing, 37, 44, 56, 63, 69, 70, 91,
97, 136, 137, 170, 194, 201, 212, 222, 226, 228, 229, 230, 239, 242,
243
Poets Teaching, 37, 70, 203, 239
Pope, Alexander (1688-1744), 39, 137, 163;
Essay on Criticism, 39, 137
"Porphyria's Lover," 140
"A Portrait of the Day," 70, 203
Pound, Ezra (1885-1972), 63, 193, 203;
Cantos, The, 193;
"In a Station of the Metro," 63;
Shih-Ching, 203
"Psalm 26," 11-12
Puttenham, George (1529?-1590), 42, 58, 59, 64, 71;

Arte of English Poesie, The, 42
R
Randall, Dudley (1914-), 100
Ransom, John Crowe (1888-1974), 23, 71;
"Bells for John Whiteside's Daughter," 23, 71
"Ray," 71
"Red, Red Rose, A," 24-25, 34-35, 119
"Resentments," 174
Revell, Donald (1954- ), 247;
"Belfast," 247
"Robbery, A," 170
"Robin and Makyn," 121, 142
Robinson, Edwin Arlington (1869-1935), 193, 254;
"House on the Hill, The," 254
"Robin to Bobbin," 44
Roethke, Theodore (1908-1963), 165, 254;
"Dirty Dinky," 165;
"Waking, The," 254
"Rondeau," 215-16
"Rondeau After a Transatlantic Telephone Call," 216
"Rondel," 220
"Rondel of Charles d'Orleans," 219

"Ropewalk, The," 232-34
"Roundelay," 223-24
"Rubaiyat for Sue Ella Tucker," 224
"Ruin, The," 111-12
"Rule of Three, The," 131, 247
S
"Sad Old Sot, A," 222
"Sapphics," 225-26
"Sapphics Against Anger," 226
Sandburg, Carl (1878-1967), 7, 64;
"Chicago," 64
Santa Claus, 139
Schnackenberg, Gjertrude (1953-), 199;
"How Did It Seem to Sylvia?," 199
"Sea Birds, The," 247
"Seed Moon," 253
Selyns, Henricus (1636-1701), 227;
"On Maids and Cats," 227
"Sestina" (Sidney), 239
"Sestina" (Swinburne), 236-37
Seven Types of Ambiguity, 51
Sewall, Samuel (1652-1730), 227;

"This Morning Tom Child, the Painter, Died," 227
"Shepherd's Carol, The," 109
Sherwin, Judith Johnson (1936-), 100
"She Walks in Beauty," 185
Shih-Ching, 203
Sidney, Philip (1554-1586), 225-26, 239;
"Sapphics," 225-26;
"Sestina," 239
Skelton, John (1464?-1529), 23, 24, 59, 227-28;
"Justice Now," 23, 227-28
"Sketches, The," 71
Slavitt, David R. (1935- ), 199;
"Another Letter to Lord Byron," 199
Sloan, Bill (1954- ), 70, 203;
"Portrit of the Day, A," 70, 203

Page 266
Smart, Christopher (1722-1771), 65, 72, 73, 113, 203;
"Coffin, the Cradle, and the Purse, The," 65;
"Of the Spiritual Musick," 72, 73, 113, 203
Some Modern Poets, 41
"Song: Ruth," 40-41
"Song for the Middle of the Night," 195
"Song from Aella," 184-85
Song of Myself, 192
"Song of Solomon, The," 9-11
"Song Out of the Italian," 121-23
Sound and Form in Modern Poetry, 23
Spenser, Edmund (1552?-1599), 192;
Faery Queen, The, 192
"Spring Song," 95
"Staying Alive," 136, 212
Steele, Timothy (1948- ), 226;
"Sapphics Against Anger," 226
Steere, Richard (1643-1721), 124-25;
"On a Sea-Storm Nigh the Coast," 124-25
Stevens, Wallace (1879-1955), 68, 230;
"Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird," 230

Stewart, Pamela (1945- ), 201
"Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening," 224
"Street Song," 170
Strong Measures:
Contemporary American Poetry in Traditional Forms, 37, 97, 100,
111, 116, 123, 149, 158, 165, 195, 199, 201, 206, 212, 214, 215,
216, 220, 224, 226, 231, 232, 239, 241, 247, 249, 254
"Sun Rising, The," 55, 176
Swift, Jonathan (1667-1745), 133-34;
"Epistle to Two Friends, An," 133-34
"Swift Replies, The," 221
Swinburne, Algernon Charles (1837-1909), 222, 236-37;
"Sestina," 236-37;
"The Way of the Wind," 222
T
Taliesin (500s?), 127-28;
"Lament for Owain ab Urien," 127-28
"Talisman, A," 149
Taylor, Edward (1645?-1729), 90;
"Acrostic Love Poem to Elizabeth Fitch," 90
Tennyson, Alfred (1809-1892), 91-92, 162, 244;
"[Catullus]," 93;
"Lotos-Eaters, The," 244;

"Milton," 92-93, 162
"Terzanelle in Thunderweather," 255
Thanatopsis," 106, 179
"Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird," 230
"This Morning Tom Child, the Painter, Died," 227
Thomas, Dylan (1914-1953), 18, 254;
"Do Not Go Gentle into That Good Night," 254
"Three Mourning Songs and an Oath," 180-81
"Three Riddles from the Anglo-Saxon," 94, 135-36
Tichborne, Chidiock (1558?-1586), 64, 70, 232;
"Elegy: On the Evening of His Execution," 64, 70, 232
"To a Girl," 129
"To a Mouse," 213
"To His Coy Mistress," 178
Tolkien, J. R. R., 22, 23
"Tom O'Bedlam's Song," 168-69
"To My Cousin, Mistress Ellinor Evins," 90
"To Old Nobodaddy," 202-3
"Trees," 41, 52
"Triolet," 249
Turco, Lewis (1934- ), 37;
"Amherst Haiku, An," see Dickinson, Emily;

Book of Forms, The, 45;
"Bordello," 100, 249;
"Dainty Sum, A," see Dickinson, Emily;
"Dialogue," 230;
"Epistles," 240;
"First Snow," see Dickinson, Emily;
"Jason Potter," 218;
"Jasper Olson," 249;

Page 267
"Lafe Grat," 124;
"Naked Eye, The," see Dickinson, Emily;
"November 22, 1963," 63;
"Old Professor, The," 137;
"Paradigm," 116, 155-56, 162, 246;
"Party Game," 32-33, 207;
Pocoangelini: A Fantography and Other Poems, 71;
"Pocoangelini 10," 207-209;
"Poetry," see Dickinson, Emily;
Poetry: An Introduction Through Writing, 37, 44, 136, 137, 170,
194, 201, 212, 222, 226, 228, 229, 230, 239, 242, 243;
"Ray," 71;
"Seed Moon," 253;
"Simon Judson," 158;
"Sketches, The," 71;
"Terzanelle in Thunderweather," 255;
"Twelve Moons," 253;
"Visitor," 37, 226;
"Will Somers," 100;
"Wind Carol, The," 111
Turner, Alberta, ed., Poets Teaching, New York, 1980, 37, 70, 203,
239

'Twelve Moons," 253
"Two Epigrams," 219
"Tyger, The," 54
U
"Unquiet Grave, The," 96-97
"Upon Leaving His Mistress," 231
"Upon Love, by Way of Question and Answer," 153-54
V
Van Riper, Daniel (1900s), 239;
"Fear and a Rose," 239
"View from Khufu's Tongue, The," 242
"Visitor," 37, 226
W
Waggoner, Hyatt H., 67;
American Poets from the Puritans to the Present, 67
Wagoner, David (1926- ), 136, 212, 254;
"Staying Alive," 136, 212
"Waking, The," 254
"Warning to Travelers," 174
Warren, Robert Penn (1905- ), 206;
"Original Sin: A Short Story," 206
Watts, Isaac, 22

"Way of the Wind," 222
"Western Wind," 245
"We Wear the Mask," 216
"What Meaneth This?," 110-11
Wheatley, Phillis (1753-1784), 176;
"Hymn to the Morning, An, 176
Where the Oceans Cover Us, 70
Whitman, Walt (1819-1892), 6-7, 114, 192;
Song of Myself, 192
Williams, Loring, 222;
"A Sad Old Sot," 222
Williams, Miller (1930-), 149, 224;
"For Victor Jara," 149;
"Rubaiyat for Sue Ella Tucker," 224
Williams, William Carlos (1883-1963), 20, 54, 155, 160, 193, 252;
Paterson, 193
"Will Somers," 100-101
Wilmot, John (1647-1680), 231;
"Upon Leaving His Mistress," 231
"Wind Carol, The," 111
"Winter," 42, 204-5
"Winter Song, A," 211

Witt, Harold (1923- ), 249;
"First Photo of Flu Virus," 249
Wordsworth, William (1770-1850), 37, 74, 194, 198;
"Ode: Intimations of Immortality," 37-38, 74, 194, 198
Wright, James (1927-1980), 195;
"Song for the Middle of the Night," 195
Wyatt, Thomas (1503-1542), 110-11, 215-16;
"Rondeau," 215-16;
"What Meaneth This?" 110-11
Y
Yeats, William Butler (1865-1939), 48, 139, 170;
"Crazy Jane and the Bishop," 48, 170

Page 269
INDEX OF TERMS
The forms of poetry are not included in this index because they are
listed alphabetically in The Book of Forms and thus constitute their
own index, complete with cross-references. They are also listed by the
number of lines they contain in the Form-Finder Index. Thus, there
are four indexes contained in this volume: (1) The Form-Finder; (2)
The Book of Forms; (3) Index of Authors and Titles, and (4) Index of
Terms. For cross references in small capitals, see the entry in The
Book of Forms.
A
Abstract (abstraction), 49-51, 53, 56, 77, 138, 139;
syntax, 67-68
Acatalexis, 29
Accent, 10, 14ff., 45-46
Accented syllable, 14ff., 39, 45-46
Accentuals, 14-24, 35-36, 94, 145-48
Accentual-syllabics, 19, 20, 23, 24ff., 36-37
Access, 190
Acephalexis, 26, 30, 94
Action, 65, 138
Adjective, 47, 51
Adverb, 47

Allegory, 48-49
Alliteration, 16ff., 20, 36, 39, 43, 46, 91, 94, 101, 107, 111, 131, 139,
140, 145-48, 152, 191, 209, 214, 230, 240, 251
Allusion, 48
Alphabet, 61
Ambiguity, 50-51, 53, 72, 191
Ambivalence. See Ambiguity
American forms, 12, 101, 116-17, 203-4, 252-53
Amphibologia. See Ambiguity
Amphibrach, 26, 30
Amphimacer, 23, 26
Amphisbaenia (amphisbaenic rhyme), 42, 62
Anachinosis, 56
Anacoluthon, 69
Anacrusis, 30
Anadiplosis, 71
Anagrams, 62. See also in Chapter 7.
Analogue, 48
Analogy, 35, 48
Analysis, 27-29, 29-32, 257ff.
Analyzed rhyme, 41-42, 204-5
Anantapodaton. See Anacoluthon
Anapest, 10, 25, 30, 39

Anaphora, 71-72, 73
Anapodaton. See Anacoluthon
Anastrophe, 68
Anchored abstraction, 50
Angle, 75-77, 190;
of reflection, 76
Answer, 57, 153-54
Antagonist, 189
Antanaclasis, 72
Antenagoge, 56
Antibacchic, 26
Anticlimax, 63, 137
Antimetabole, 73
Antinomy. See Anthithesis; Paradox
Antiphrasis, 56
Antipophora, 56
Antisthecon, 62
Antistrophe, 73, 195, 199
Antithesis, 48, 51, 56, 63, 72
Antithetical parallel, 10-11, 63
Antitheton, 56
Antonomasia, 70, 71

Page 270
Aphaeresis, 61, 62
Aphorism, 134, 200
Apocopated rhyme, 40, 61
Apocope, 61, 62
Apology, 59
Apophasis, 137
Aporia, 56
Aposiopesis, 70, 71
Apostrophe, 56, 152
Apposition, 69
Approximate rhyme. See Consonance
Arabic Forms, 224
Archaic diction (archaism) See Diction
Archetype (archetypal symbolism), 53-54
Argument, 3-4, 56, 57, 58, 59, 136-37, 153-56, 195
Arsis. See Breve
Article, 15, 69
Artifice (artificer). See Makir (maker); Poet
Association, 48
Assonance, 16, 20, 43, 46, 107, 152, 251
Asteismus, 57

Asterisk, 56
Asyndeton, 69-70, 73
Atmosphere, 3, 189
Atonic. See Breve
Attitude, 189
Audience, 152
Author (authors), 259ff.
Autobiography, 3, 75
Automatic response. See Cue (cue word)
Auxesis, 63
B
Bacchic, 26
Backward rhyme. See Amphisbaenia (amphisbaenic rhyme)
Base style, 74
Bathos, 52
Beat. See Accent; Stress
Biography, 3, 117
Blank, 27, 29, 81, 91, 101, 191
Body, 190
Brachiologa, 63
Brachycatalexis, 30
Breath-pause. See Line-phrasing

Breve, 10, 24, 28, 45
Broadside verse, 21
Broken rhyme. See Apocopated rhyme.
Bucolics, 77, 105-6, 142
Burden, 44, 96, 103-4, 108-11
Buried word. See End-word
C
Cacophony, 43
Cacosyntheton, 68
Cadence, ix, 8
Caesura, 7, 16ff., 21-22, 24, 25, 31, 40, 145-48, 202
Calligramme, 6
Canto, 6
Capitalization, 44, 45, 46
Carmen figuratum. See SPATIALS
Catachresis, 53
Catalexis, 30
Catalog, 11, 63, 64, 113
Catalog vehicle. See Dyfalu
Cauda. See Coda
Celtic forms, 12, 16, 38, 91. See also Irish forms; Welsh forms
Character (characterization), 3, 66, 67, 71, 74-77, 138, 139, 188-93

Charientismus, 57
Chiasmus, 154
Chime, 39ff.
Chinese forms, 159
Chorus, 44, 138, 139, 152, 195
Christabel meter. See Dipodics
Chronographia, 46, 67
Classical (classical, classical discourse), 136-37
Classical forms, 15, 148-49, 162-63, 195, 225
Classical prosody. See Quantitative accentual-syllabics.
Clause, 10-11, 32, 50, 61, 62, 63ff., 73, 155, 246, 252. See also
Sentence
Climactic parallel, 10-11

Page 271
Climax, 57, 63, 137, 191
Closed, cloture, 31-32, 191
Coda, 57, 102, 108, 125, 152, 217, 242. See also Envoi; Epithonema
Comedy (comic), 138
Comma, 63
Commiato, 108
Comparison, 48, 151
Compensation, 31
Compensatory caesura, 31
Complexio. See Symploce
Complex metaphor. See Conceit
Complication. See Plot.
Compound ending, 41
Compound mode. See Mode; CHANTE-FABLE; DRAMATICS
Compound rhyme, 40
Compound tenor, 49
Conceit, 49-53, 55
Concept. See Conceit; Idea (ideational level)
Conclusion, 4, 137, 191, 195
Concrete (concretion), 50
Concrete verse, 6

Conduplicatio. See Anadiplosis
Confirmatio, 137
Conflict. See Narration; Plot
Confusion, 51
Conjunction, 15, 69-70, 73
Connotation, 50-53, 68, 160
Consonance, 17, 41, 46, 91, 111, 151, 168, 203, 209, 214
Consonant, 16, 17-18, 33-34, 39, 40, 41, 62
Consonantal echo. See Echo.
Consonantal silence, 33-34
Consonantal suppression, 34
Consonate. See Consonance
Construction (constructional schemas), 42, 63-64
Content, 105. See also Ideational level
Context, 15, 41, 46, 48, 49-53, 57, 71
Contraction, 33-34, 61-62
Contradiction, 51, 56, 58
Contrast, 48
Convention, 61, 68, 131
Copla. See COBLA
Correlative poetry. See Catalog
Counter-elision. See Contraction

Counterpoint, 26, 29ff.
Couplet rhyme, 44
Cretic. See Amphimacer
Crisis, 190
Critical moment, 190
Croes. See Cynghanedd groes
Cross-consonance. See Consonance
Cross-rhyme, 40, 95, 111, 130, 131, 140, 207, 209, 214, 230, 248
Cubist poetry. See SPATIALS
Cue (cue word), 52
Cursus. See Mode
Cynghanedd (including draws, groes, lusg, sain), 17-18, 39, 43, 91
D
Dactyl, 25, 31, 37, 39
Debates. See Forensics
Decorum. See Proportion; Style; Subject
Dedication. See ELEGY; ENCOMIUM; ODE, PAEAN
Definition, 49-50, 57, 58, 67, 77, 81, 90ff.
Demotion, 20, 25, 26, 29
Denotation, 50, 68, 160
Denouement, 152, 191
Descend, 29

Descend-and-rise, 23
Descending rhythm. See Falling (rhythm)
Description, 45, 47-48, 189
Devotional poetry. See LITURGICS
Diaeresis, 62
Diagram. See Schematic diagrams
Dialect (dialectic, dialect rhyme), 34, 43, 62
Dialisis, 57
Dialogismus (Dialogue), 3, 139
Dibrach. See Pyrrhic
Diction, ix, 33, 68, 74-77
Didactics, 77, 132-137, 142
Digression. See Parecnasis

Page 272
Diminishing metaphor, 51-52
Diphthong (diphthong rhyme), 46, 150-51
Dipodics (dipody), 16-17, 21-23, 117, 134
Direct address. See Apostrophe
Dislocation. See Hyperbaton
Dissonance, 43
Dissyllable, 72, 209, 210, 214, 239
Distich, 21, 128, 162
Distributed stress. See Spondee
Divider, 10, 24, 28
Double-fall, 22
Double Forms, 121, 138, 157, 206
Double iamb, 23, 26, 29
Double rhyme, 40
Double-rise, 22
Double trochee, 26
Drama (dramatics), 3, 138-40, 142, 176;
dramatist, 3, 5;
situation, 189;
syntax, 66-67;
voice, 75-77

Dunadh, 73
Duple meters. See Dipodics (dipody)
Duration, 35
Dyfalu, 52
E
Echo (echoics), 16, 17-18, 20, 43-44, 73, 91, 203, 251;
verse, 105
Ecphonesis, 57
Egopoetic, 75-77;
syntax, 65-67
Elevation (elevated language), 74
Elision, 30, 31, 33-34, 61-62
Ellipsis, 69, 159
Elliptical syllepsis, 70
Emblem, 51
Emote (emotion, emotive), 137, 153-56, 159-62, 253
Empathy, 75-77, 138, 160
Emphasis, 73. See also Rhetorical stress
Enallage, 70
Enargia. See Sonic level
End rhyme, 39, 158
End-stopping, 7, 27

End-word, 73, 234-39
English forms, 94, 102-4, 108-11, 117, 118-23, 162-63, 185-86, 198,
202, 206, 213, 222-24, 225, 227-28, 241-42, 243-45
Enigma, 47
Enjambed rhyme, 40
Enjambment, 7, 27, 32, 103
Envelope verse, 44
Envoi (envoy), 98-101, 102, 114, 115, 152, 234-39
Epanadiplosis. See Anadiplosis
Epanalepsis, 73
Epanaphora. See Anaphora
Epanodis, 73, 203
Epenthis, 61
Epigraph, 94, 157, 196
Epimone, 73
Epiphora, 73
Epistrophe. See Epiphora
Epithet. See Utterance
Epithetic compound, 47-48
Epitheton, 69
Epithonema, 57
Epitropis, 57
Epizeuxis, 73

Epode, 195
Equivalence. See Quality
Erotema, 57
Essay (essayist), 3-4, 5
Etiologia, 57
Eulogy. See ENCOMIUM; ODE
Euphony, 43
Evocation. See Association; Atmosphere; Connotation; Sensory level
Exclusion (exclusive), 51, 57, 75, 191;
schemas, 69-70
Exordium, 136
Exposition, 3, 36-37, 190
Extended metaphor, 49-53, 55
Eye rhyme. See Sight rhyme
F
Fable, 101. See also Allegory
Fall-and-ascend, 22
Falling (ending, meters, rhyme, rhythm), 21, 39, 127-28, 168-69, 225
False rhyme, 41

Page 273
Farfet, 71
Feminine (ending, rhyme, rhythm). See Falling
Fiction (fictionist, fictive), 3
Figure (figurative language, figure of speech). See Sensory level
First person. See Person
Fit, 6
Folk meter. See Podics
Folk poetry, 21, 37, 95-97
Foot. See Verse foot
Forensics, 77, 142, 153-56
Form (formal, formalism), ix-x, 61, 81ff.;
sentence, 74
Form-Finder Index, 81ff.
Found poetry, 14
Free meters. See Welsh forms
Free verse. See Prose
French forms, 12, 36, 46, 73, 98-101, 104-5, 106, 108-11, 114, 115-
16, 118, 132, 165-66, 166-71, 191, 192, 198-99, 212-13, 215-21, 228,
234-39, 248-49, 254-56
Full stop. See Closed (cloture)
Fusion, 4, 257ff.;
analysis, 258

G
Gender, 70
General Form, 38, 81, 86tt
Genre, 3ff., 5, 76-77, 105, 132, 138, 176, 183-84, 188, 194, 226, 242
Gloss, 156, 159, 188, 246. See also GLOsE
Gnome (gnomic verse). See Aphorism; Parimia
Grammar (grammatics), 8-11, 50, 63ff., 252
Grammatic enjambment. See Enjambment; Grammar
Gratuitous metaphor, 52
Greek forms, 92, 116, 148-49, 162-63, 195, 199, 225
Greek prosody. See Quantitative accentual-syllabics
H
Halfunit, 21. See also Hemistich
Hamartia. See TRAGEDY
Harangue, 137. See also FLYTING
Headless. See Acephalexis
Headless iamb, 26, 30, 103
Headnote, 157
Head rhyme, 40
Hebrew forms, 9-12
Hemistich, 16-19, 21-23, 24, 145-48
Hendiadys, 69

Hero (heroic). See Dramatics; Protagonist, TRAGEDY
Heroic forms, 162-63, 191, 205-7, 215, 232, 241-42
Hesitation. See Caesura; Line phrasing
Hexameter, 93. See also CLASSICAL HEXAMETER
Hiatus. See Caesura
Hieroglyphic verse. See SPATIALS
High style, 74, 75
Historical rhyme, 43
Homoeomeral. See HORATIAN ODE
Homoeoteluton. See Rhyme
Homograph, 62
Homographic rhyme, 62
Homomorph, 62
Homonym (homonymic rhyme), 62
Homophone. See Rich rhyme
Homostrophic. See HORATIAN ODE
Hovering accent. See Spondee
Hypallage, 68, 237-38
Hyperbaton, 68
Hyperbole, 71
Hypercatalexis, 30, 31
Hyperrhythmic. See Diaeresis

Hyphaeresis, 62
Hypotiposis, 47
Hypozeugma, 69
Hypozeuxis, 73
Hysteron proteron, 69
I
Tamb (iambics), 10, 25, 26, 30, 31, 39
Icon (iconographia), 47
Ictus, 10, 16, 24, 28
Idea (ideational level), ix, 4, 51, 53,

Page 274
61ff., 137, 140, 160, 188;
analysis, 258;
thought, 65-67
Identical rhyme. See End-word; Repetition; Rich rhyme
Identity of sound. See True rhyme
Ideogram, 243
Idiom (idiomatic expression), 50, 71;
style, 74
Image (imagery) See Sensory level
Imagism, 54-55, 160
Imperfect rhyme. See Consonance
Implication. See Overtone
Implied Aposiopesis, 71
Implied metaphor. See Subdued metaphor
Imprecation. See CURSE
Impression (impressionism, impressionist), 54
Inciting moment, 190
Inclusion (inclusive), 50-51, 76-77, 191;
schemas, 69-70
Incremental (refrain, repetition), 44, 102, 203
Indentation, 14, 19, 44

Inflection, 36
Initial rhyme. See Head rhyme
Initiating action. See Inciting moment
In medias res, 190
Inscription. See EPITAPH
Interlaced rhyme, 40
Interlocking rhyme. See PANTOUM; RUBAIYAT; TERZA RIMA; VIRELAI
Internal rhyme, 40, 96, 101, 158, 209
Interpretation, 51
Intonation, 35
Intuition, 53, 154-56
Invented prosodies, 38-39
Inversion, 68-69, 73
Inverted accent or stress. See Quality
Invocation. See ENVOY; LITURGICS
Irish forms, 12, 46, 91, 111-12, 131-32, 140-41, 207-10, 214, 228-30,
239-40
Irmus, 70
Ironia (irony), 57-58, 59, 71
Irrelevance, 51
Isocolon, 11-12, 63
Isoverbal prosody, 11-12, 63
Italian forms, 101, 107, 108, 163, 185, 194-95, 199, 205-7, 214-15,

232, 241-42, 247, 254-55
Italics, 16, 73
J
Japanese forms, 12, 116, 154-56, 159-62, 230-31, 240, 243, 245-47
Journalism, 3
K
Kenning, 48, 71
Kind. See Genre
L
Language (language equation), 4, 49, 50
Latin forms. See Classical forms; Greek forms; Italian forms
Layout. See Typographical level
Leaping and lingering, 96
Lessons. See Didactics
Letter, 61, 71
Level. See Poetic levels
Level of diction. See Diction
Light accent or stress. See Secondary accent or stress
Light rhyme, 39, 127-28, 131
Line (lines), ix, 5-7, 8ff., 16ff., 27, 29ff., 32, 44, 46, 71ff., 74, 81ff.,
110-11, 188;
Adonic (Sapphic), 37;

length, 45
Line-phrasing, 7, 9-10, 155, 203, 252
Linked rhyme, 40
List. See Catalog
Litotes, 58, 60, 71
Logic, 53, 154
Long rise, 23, 24
Long rocking foot, 23
Long syllable sound (long vowels). See Quantity
Lyon rhyme, 42
Lyric (lyrical), 75-77, 96

Page 275
M
Macron, 24
Main rhyme, 46, 106-7, 128-29, 152, 166, 210, 251
Main story line, 191
Maker (makir). See Poet
Malayan forms, 200
Mannerism. See Poetic diction
Margin, 6, 44
Masculine (ending, rhyme, rhythm). See Rising
Meaning, 68
Mean style, 74
Meiosis, 58, 63
Memorials. See Occasionals
Merismus, 70
Mesozeugma, 69
Metalepsis, 71
Metanoia, 58
Metaphor (metaphoric construction), 48-53, 55, 71, 160
Metaphysical poetry, 55
Metastasis, 137
Meter (metrics), ix, 5-7, 8ff., 21, 24ff., 59, 81, 93

Metonymy, 71
Metrical enjambment. See Counterpoint; Enjambment
Metrical notation. See Notation
Metrical prosodies, 12tf.
Metrical tail. See Bob AND wHeeL; cauda; coda
Metrics. See Meter
Micterismus, 58
Middle English, 36
Mixed metaphor, 53
Mixed meters. See DESCORT
Mock forms. See SATIRICS
Mode, ix, 4, 5-7, 14, 138
Modifier, 47, 49
Molossus, 26
Monologue, 3, 123, 138, 139-40
Monostrophic. See CoBLA
Mora (moriacs), 39
Moral, 49
Mosaic rhyme, 41
Motif. See Archetype; Theme
Movement, 108, 180, 195
Muses, 176

Myth, 138
N
Nadir, 63, 137
Narratio, 136
Narration (narrative), 3-4, 5, 48-49, 95-97, 106, 176, 188-93;
syntax, 65-66;
voice, 74-75, 189-90
Near-rhyme. See Consonance
Negative shaping, 242
Neologism, 47, 71
Nickname, 71
Noema, 58
Nonce forms, 81 108, 114, 124-25, 192, 197, 199, 207
Nonfiction, 3
Norm (normative), 12, 13, 15, 24-25, 28-29, 41
Normative wordcount. See Isoverbal prosody
Norse forms, 145-48
Notation, 37-38, 44, 45, 46
Noun, 8-9, 15, 41, 49-51, 62, 70, 75
Novel (novelist, novella), 193
Number, 70;
singular and plural, 69

Numbers. See Meter
Object (objective, objectivity), 9, 49-50, 69, 75-77, 160, 189, 190
Objective correlative, 53, 160
Oblique rhyme. See Consonance
Obscurity, 47, 50-51, 53
Occasionals, 77, 106, 194, 195-99
Off-rhyme. See Consonance
Old English, 35-36
Omiosis, 48
Omoioteleton, 41-45
Onomatopoeia, 43
Open couplet. See Enjambment
Open-end, 191
Open verse. See Enjambment
Opinion, 56
Opposition, 72
Option, 34, 99
Organic metaphor, 52

Page 276
Orientation, 189
Orismus, 58
Orthographical schemes, 42, 61-62
Orthographic rhyme, 42-43
Orthography, 42-43, 61-62
Outride prosody. See Mora (moraics)
Overstatement. See Hyperbole
Overstressing. See Sprung rhythm
Overt elision, 33, 61-62
Overtone, ix, 48, 50-51, 159, 160
Oxymoron, 48, 52
P
Palindrome, 62
Parabola, 48
Paradiastole, 71
Paradox (paradoxon), 48, 51, 52, 57, 64, 138
Paragon, 137
Paragraph, 67
Paralepsis, 58
Parallelism, 8-11, 63ff., 71-73, 154
Paramalogia, 58

Paraphrase, 10-11, 63, 246
Pararhyme. See Consonance
Parecnasis, 137
Parenthesis, 68-69
Parenthetic prosody, 69
Parimia, 59
Parimion, 43
Parisia, 59
Parison, 64
Parody. See Satirics
Parts of speech, 8-9, 15, 69-73
Pastorals. See Bucolics
Pathetic fallacy, 52-53, 160
Pathos, 52, 138
Pause, 63. See also Caesura; Line phrasing
Pedagogy, 3
Penultimate, 18
Pertect parallel, 11-12, 63
Periphrasis, 71
Peroration, 137
Person, 75-76, 117, 188-90
Persona, 66, 67, 76

Personification, 52, 56, 139, 160
Phanopoeia. See Sensory level
Phrasal pause. See Line-phrasing; Phrase (phrasing)
Phrase (phrasing), 31, 44, 47, 50, 52, 58, 61, 62, 63ff., 94, 110-11,
155, 188, 203, 246, 252
Piedi. See CANZONE
Pitch, 35
Play. See DRAMATICS
Ploce, 73
Plot, 3, 138, 188-93
Podics, 20ff., 25, 29, 37, 95-97, 168-70
Poem, 73, 76, 81ff.
Poesy, 3-4, 5, 113-14
Poet, 26
Poetaster, 26
Poetic diction, 33, 68, 74-77. See also Diction
Poetic levels, 4
Poetic mask. See Persona
Poetics. See Prosody
Poetic syntax. See Syntax
Poetic voice, 74-77
Poetry. See Poem; Poesy
Point-of-view. See Poetic voice; Viewpoint

Polyptoton, 73
Polyrhythmic. See Variable accentual-syllabics
Polysyllabic rhyme. See Rhyme
Polysyndeton, 69, 73
Portmanteau word, 47-48
Portuguese forms, 156-57
Positive shaping, 242
Pragmatographia, 47
Predicate, 8-9, 74
Prefix, 14, 21, 27
Pregunta, 153-54
Preposition, 15, 70
Primary story line. See Plot; Protagonist
Procatalepsis, 59
Proceleusmaticus. See Verse foot
Proem. See INVOCATION
Prolepsis, 70, 73

Page 277
Promotion, 15, 20, 24, 29
Pronoun, 8-9, 15, 70
Pronunciation, 29, 43
Proparalepsis, 61
Proportion, 39-45;
in figure 5-6, 44;
in measure, 44;
in rhyme, 19, 21, 25, 44, 45-46, 72;
in treatment, 44-45, 81, 90ff.
proposition, 57
prose, ix, x, 5, 6, 8-11, 14, 24, 27, 36, 42, 59;
prose poem, 113, 203-4
Prose rhythm. See Cursus
Prosodic notation. See Notation
Prosodics, ix, 8ff., 69
Prosodics, ix, 8ff., 69
Prosodic symbols. See Notation
Prosodic systems. See Prosodics
Prosody. See Prosodics
Prosonomasia, 71
Prosopographia, 47

Prosopopeia, 52
Prosthesis, 61
Protagonist, 75, 138, 188-89
Prototype. See Archetype
Provencal forms. See French forms
Proverb. See Parimia
Prozeugma, 69
Pruning. See apocope; DIMINISHING VERSE
Pun, 42, 49, 57-58, 72, 227
Punctuation, 6, 7, 25-26, 31, 33, 63
Punctuational caesura, 63
Pyrrhic, 26
Q
Qualitative caesura, 31
Quality, 29, 30-31
Quantitative accentuals. See Accentuals
Quantitative accentual-syllabics, 35-37, 92
Quantitative syllabics. See Syllabics
Quantitative wordcount. See Isoverbal prosody
Quantity, 35-37, 92, 93
Question, 153-54, 190
Quintet envelope, 44

Quotation. See Epigraph; Text
R
Rant. See Harangue
Rational (rationality). See Ideational level
Reader. See Audience; Convention
Recapitulative verse. See cATALoG
Recessive stress. See Promotion; demotion
refrain, 44, 45, 46, 73, 96, 98-101, 103-4, 108-11, 115, 165-66, 175,
177, 184, 215-21, 222-24, 234-39, 246
Refrain indicator. See notation
Refutatio, 137
Regularity, 81
Repetend, 44
Repetition, 9-10, 41, 42, 43-44, 45-46, 203;
schemas, 71-73
Repeton, 44, 46, 102, 157, 200, 223, 255
Representation. See Symbol
Requesta, 153, 154
Resolution. See Narration; plot
Response, 141, 171, 247. See also ANTIPHoN; mondo, Pregunta
Respuesta, 153-54
Retraction, 58, 199
Reverberation. See Overtone

Rhetoric, 3-4, 15, 29, 56tt., 75, 136-37
Rhetorical figures. See Rhetorical trope
Rhetorical question, 57
Rhetorical stress, 15, 29, 69, 73
Rhetorical trope, 56ff
Rhyme, ix, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 27, 39ff., 45-46, 72, 91
rhyme scheme. See Proportion
Rhythm, ix, 8ff., 51, 62
Rich rhyme, 41, 62
Rime, 62. See also Rhyme
Rime riche. See Rich rhyme
Rise-and-descend, 22
Rise-and-fall, 22, 24
Rising (ending, meters, rhyme, rhythm), 21, 39, 127-28
Rising action. See Plot
Romantic, 105
Root, 14, 21, 27, 73

Page 278
Rune. See ANGLO-SAXON PROSODY, LITURGICS, LYRICS
Running foot, 24ff., 31
Run-on lines. See Enjambment
Ryme. See Rime
S
Sarcasm (sarcasmus), 58, 59
Satirics, 77, 108, 117, 164, 204, 226-29
Scan (scansion), 5-7, 9ff., 20, 27ff., 45-46
Schematic diagrams, x, 20, 25, 45, 46
Scottish forms, 12, 106, 156, 213
Secondary accent or stress, 15-16, 20, 24, 28, 29
Secondary rhyme, 106-7, 152, 251
Second distance. See TRIPLET
Semi-cloture. See Cloture
Semi-vocalic elision. See Elision
Semi-vowel. See Elision; Vowel
Sense, 53, 61ff.
Sensory level, ix, 4, 47ff., 137, 159, 160;
analysis, 257-58
Sentence, 6, 10-12, 15, 27, 61, 74, 188, 252
Sententia (sententious). See Aphorism; Schemas; Truism

Sequence, 63, 242, 246
Series, 63
Setting, 189
Shape (shaped stanza). See SPATIALS
Short rocking foot, 23
Short story. See FABLIAU; NARRATIVES
Short syllable sound (short vowels). See Quantity
Sicilian forms, 163, 194-95, 199, 206-7, 231, 232, 239, 241-42, 247
Sight counterpoint, See Counterpoint; Indentation; Typographical
level
Sight punctuation, 7
Sight rhyme, 42-43
Sight rhythm. See Sight counterpoint; Spatial
Simile (Similetic trope), 48
Sinathrismus, 64. See also Catalog
Single rhyme, 40
Sirima, 108
Slant rhyme. See Consonance
Solecismus. See Diction; Parallelism; Syntax
Soliloquy, 3, 140
Sonic level, ix, 4, 5, 8ff., 43, 44, 73, 75, 91, 137;
analysis, 257
Space, 63

Spanish Forms, 108, 153-54, 156-57, 188, 205, 206, 212, 232
Spatial caesura. See Caesura; Eye rhythm; Sight counterpoint
Spatials, 6, 242-43
Specific form, 38, 81ff
Spelling. See Orthography
Spondee, 26, 30, 31
Sprung rhythm, 16ff., 19, 21, 25, 94
Staff. See Stanza
Stand. See Epode; PINDARIC ODE
Stanza, ix, 5, 6, 7, 31, 44, 45, 71, 73, 74, 81
Stasis, 137
Statement, 56, 58, 70, 73, 136, 188, 246
Stepping, 7, 18, 135-36
Stich, 7, 16-19, 21-23, 144-48
Story. See Narrative
Stress, 15ff., 35-37, 94, 111, 127, 140, 145-48, 155, 209
Stressed syllable, 5-9, 14ff., 24ff., 30, 31, 43, 46
Stress prosody. See Accentuals
Stophe, 5, 6, 7, 180, 199
Style, ix, 74-75, 138
Subdued metaphor, 50, 51
Subdued simile. See Simile

Subgenre, 14, 76-77, 105-6, 132, 138, 153, 176, 188, 194, 226, 242
Subject, 3-4, 8-9, 48-50, 54, 60, 69-70, 74, 75, 77, 132, 136, 188
Subjective (subjectivity), 65, 190
Subplot. See Narratives; TRAGICOMEDY
Substantive. See Noun
Substitution, 58;
schemas, 70-71. See also Quality
Surrealism, 54

Page 279
Suspended rhyme. See Consonance
Syllabic-accentuals, 38, 127
Syllabic length. See Quantity
Syllabics, 5-7, 12-14, 35-36, 91, 113-14
Syllable, 5-7, 8ff., 20, 25, 28, 30, 33-34, 40, 45-46, 61-62, 70ff., 95
Syllable-count. See Syllabics
Syllepsis, 70
Syllogism, 154
Symbol, 45-46, 49-50, 51, 53-54, 61, 160
Symbolism, 53, 54
Sympathy. See Empathy
Symploce, 73
Synalepha, 61, 62
Syncopation. See Counterpoint
Syncope, 61, 62
Synechdoche, 71
Synesthesia, 51
Synonym (synonymia, synonymous parallel), 10-11, 63, 69, 70-71,
73, 128
Syntax, ix, 64-69, 74, 237-38
Synthesis (synthetic parallel), 10-11, 63, 102

System. See Prosodics
T
Tail. See Coda
Tail-glide. See Elision
Tailless trochee, 26, 30
Tapinosis, 59-60
Telescoped metaphor. See Conceit
Tenor, 49-53, 54
Tense, 8, 70
Tension. See Proportion
Tetrameter. See Accentual-syllabics
Tetrapodics. See Podics
Texte, 108-11, 157, 188, 217, 242
Theme, 3, 54, 77, 188-89
Thesis, 4, 136-37
Third distance. See ENVELOPE STANZA; QUATRAIN; Proportion
Thought. See Ideational level
Tmesis, 62
Tone, 74
Topographia, 47
Tornada. See Envoi (envoy)
Tradition, 53ff., 81, 96, 152, 191, 195, 203, 237

Tragic flaw. See TRAGEDY
Transposition, 94
Treatment. See Proportion
Tribrach, 26
Trimeter. See Accentual-syllabics
Triple rhyme, 40
Triplet rhyme, 44
Trisyllable, 72, 111, 140
Trite rhyme, 41
Trochee, 25, 26, 31, 37, 39
Trope, 47ff., 56ff., 71
True rhyme. See Rhyme
Truism. See Aphorism; Parimia
Truncation. See Catalexis
Tumbling verse, 23, 24
Turn, 239, 241-42, 246. See also Volta
Typographical level, ix, 4, 5ff., 44, 63, 242;
analysis, 257;
typeface, 73
U
Unaccented syllable. See Unstressed syllable
Unanchored abstraction, 50-51

Understatement. See Litotes
Unit. See coupler; dipodics; LIvE; stanza; syllable; verse; verse foot
Unrhymed syllable, 45
Unstressed syllable, 5-7, 14ff., 24ff., 29, 30, 43, 45, 61, 168
Utterance, 154-56, 253
V
Valediction, 108
Variable accentuals, 15, 155, 252
Variable accentual-syllabics, 24, 37-38
Variable foot, 155, 252
Variable podics. See Podics
Variable rhyme. See Rhyme
Variable syllabics. See Syllabics
Variable word-count. See Isoverbal prosody
Variation, 26
Vehicle, 49-53, 54-55, 160
Verb, 8-9, 15, 41, 47, 49, 62, 70